<?xml version="1.0"?>
<bibl-ref bibl-dtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" id="SL89974" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="89973" slsdocid="73678" slsdocty="bibl-section bibl-dtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
          
          <bibl-section id="AO.DIR.368" id-root="ao.dir" iso="ao" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="BIBL-REF" usage="ass">
               <heading>Bibliography</heading>
               <alt-heading type="SECTION-LONG-UPPERCASE" usage="ass">Angola</alt-heading>
               <alt-heading type="COUNTRY-SHORT-TITLECASE" usage="ass">Bibliography</alt-heading>
               <bibl-list>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.370" type="FULL">
          Andresen Guimarães, F. 
          <i>The Origins of the Angolan Civil War: Foreign Intervention and Domestic Political Conflict.</i>
           Basingstoke, Palgrave, 2001.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.371" type="FULL">
          Anstee, M. 
          <i>Orphan of the Cold War: The Inside Story of the Collapse of the Angolan Peace Process</i>
          . London, Macmillan, and New York, St Martin’s Press, 1996.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.1706051800" type="FULL">
          Bender, G. J. 
          <i>Angola Under the Portuguese: The Myth and the Reality</i>
          . Lawrenceville, NJ, Africa World Press, 2004.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.373" type="FULL">
          Birmingham, D. 
          <i>Empire in Africa: Angola and its Neighbors</i>
          . Columbus, OH, Ohio State University Press, 2006.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
                         <i>Short History of Modern Angola</i>
          . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2015.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.374" type="FULL">
          Bridgland, F. 
          <i>Jonas Savimbi: A Key to Africa.</i>
           Edinburgh, Mainstream, 1986.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
                         <i>The War for Africa: 12 Months that Transformed a Continent</i>
          . Oxford, Casemate, 2017.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.377" type="FULL">
          Cann, J. P. 
          <i>The Flechas. Insurgent Hunting in Eastern Angola, 1965–1974</i>
          . Solihull, Helion and Co., 2013.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Capoco, Z. 
          <i>Nacionalismo e Construção do Estado-Angola (1945–1975)</i>
          . Lobito, Angola, Escolar Editora, 2012. 
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.1212746962" type="FULL">
          Chabal, P., and Videl, N. (Eds). 
          <i>Angola: The Weight of History</i>
          . New York, Columbia University Press, 2007.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.1183538065" type="FULL">
          Cilliers, J., and Dietrich, C. (Eds). 
          <i>Angola's War Economy: The Role of Oil and Diamonds</i>
          . Pretoria, Institute for Security Studies, 2000.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.378" type="FULL">
          Conçalves, J. 
          <i>Economics and Politics of the Angolan Conflict: The Transition Re-Negotiated</i>
          . Bellville Centre for Southern Africa Studies, University of the Western Cape, 1995.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Corkin, L. 
          <i>Uncovering African Agency: Angola's Management of China's Credit Lines</i>
          . Farnham, Ashgate, 2013.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          De Oliveira, R. S. 
          <i>Magnificent and Beggar Land: Angola since the Civil War</i>
          . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2015.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Faria, P. C. J. 
          <i>The Post-War Angola: Public Sphere, Political Regime and Democracy</i>
          . Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Cambridge Scholars, 2013.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Galliani, F. 
          <i>Portrait of the New Angola</i>
          . Milan, Skira Editore, 2012.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          García Rodríguez, J.-L., García Rodríguez, F. J., and Castilla Gutiérrez, C. 
          <i>Power of Oil in Angola</i>
          . New York, Nova Science Publishers, 2014.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.1706051750" type="FULL">
          George, E. 
          <i>The Cuban Intervention in Angola (1965–1991), from Che Guevara to Cuito Cuanavale</i>
          . London, Frank Cass, 2005.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Hatzky, C. 
          <i>Cubans in Angola: South-South Cooperation and Transfer of Knowledge, 1976–1991</i>
          . Madison, WI, University of Wisconsin Press, 2015.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.384" type="FULL">
          Heywood, L. 
          <i>Contested Power in Angola, 1840s to the Present</i>
          . Rochester, NY, University of Rochester Press, 2000.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.385" type="FULL">
          Hodges, T. 
          <i>Angola: Anatomy of an Oil State.</i>
           Oxford, James Currey Publrs, 2004.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Júnior, M. 
          <i>Angola: The Failure of Operation Savannah 1975</i>
          . Bloomington, IN, AuthorHouse, 2015.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Kisalu Kiala, A. 
          <i>Angola, La Trajectoire Dramatique d’Un Pays</i>
          . Paris, L'Harmattan, 2015.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.389" type="FULL">
          MacQueen, N. 
          <i>The Decolonization of Portuguese Africa: Metropolitan Revolution and the Dissolution of Empire</i>
          . Harlow, Longman, 1997.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Maier, K. 
          <i>Angola: Promises and Lies</i>
          . London, Serif Books, 2007.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.393" type="FULL">
          Martin, J.&#160;W. 
          <i>A Political History of the Civil War in Angola, 1974–90</i>
          . New Brunswick, NJ, Transaction Publishers, 1992.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.1248868162" type="FULL">
          Mendes, P. R. 
          <i>Bay of Tigers: A journey through war-torn Angola</i>
          . London, Granta, 2004.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Moorman, J. 
          <i>Powerful Frequencies: Radio, State Power, and the Cold War in Angola, 1931–2002</i>
          . Athens. OH, Ohio University Press, 2010.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Pawson, L. 
          <i>In the Name of the People: Angola’s Forgotten Massacre</i>
          . London, I.B. Tauris, 2014.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.1248868236" type="FULL">
          Pearce, J. 
          <i>An Outbreak of Peace: Angola's Situation of `Confusion'</i>
          . Cape Town, New Africa Books, 2005.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
                         <i>Political Identity and Conflict in Central Angola, 1975–2002</i>
          . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2015.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Power, M., and Alves, A. (Eds). 
          <i>China and Angola: A Marriage of Convenience?</i>
           Oxford, Pambazuka Press, 2012.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Roque, P. C. 
          <i>Governing in the Shadows: Angola’s Securitised State</i>
          . London, Hurst &amp; Co., 2021.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.401" type="FULL">
          Shaxson, N. 
          <i>Poisoned Wells: The Dirty Politics of African Oil</i>
          . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2008.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Scholz, L. 
          <i>The Battle of Cuito Cuanavale: Cold War Angolan Finale, 1987-1988</i>
          . Solihull, Helion &amp; Co, 2016.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Venter, A. J. 
          <i>Battle for Angola: The End of the Cold War in Africa c1975-89</i>
          . Solihull, Helion &amp; Co, 2017.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry type="FULL">
          Weigert, S. 
          <i>Angola: A Modern Military History, 1961–2002.</i>
           Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.408" type="FULL">
          Wheeler, D.&#160;L., and Pélissier, R. 
          <i>Angola</i>
          . London, Greenwood Press, 1978.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.240920131518" type="FULL">
          World Bank. 
          <i>Angola: Oil, Broad-based Growth, and Equity</i>
          . Washington, DC, 2013.
        </bibl-entry>
                    <bibl-entry id="AO.DIR.409" type="FULL">
          Wright, G. 
          <i>The Destruction of a Nation: United States Policy towards Angola since 1945</i>
          . London, Pluto Press, 1997.
        </bibl-entry>
               </bibl-list>
          </bibl-section>
     </bibl-ref>
