<?xml version="1.0"?>
<bibl-section id="ASS.BOOKS.1" id-root="ass.books" iso="ass" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="BIBL-REF" usage="ass" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
     <heading>Select Bibliography (Books)</heading>
     <alt-heading type="SECTION-LONG-UPPERCASE" usage="ass">Regional Information</alt-heading>
     <alt-heading type="COUNTRY-SHORT-TITLECASE" usage="ass">Select Bibliography (Books)</alt-heading>
     <heading-note>See also bibliographies at end of relevant chapters in Part Two.</heading-note>
     <bibl-list>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201535587" type="FULL">
      Abdulahi, A. 
      <i>Governance and Internal Wars in Sub-Saharan Africa: Exploring the Relationship</i>
      . London, Adonis &amp; Abbey Publishers, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Abegunrin, O. 
      <i>Africa in Global Politics in the Twenty-First Century: A Pan-African Perspective</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.201309241253" type="FULL">
      Abrahamsen, R. 
      <i>Conflict and Security in Africa</i>
      . Woodbridge, James Currey, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.120626092023" type="FULL">
      Abramova, I. (Ed.). 
      <i>Africa: Colonizers’ Unpaid Debt</i>
      . Moscow, Institute for African Studies, 2023.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1275407718" type="FULL">
      Achebe, C. 
      <i>Africa: Altered States, Ordinary Miracles</i>
      . London, Portobello Books Ltd, 2008.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.333" type="FULL">
      Adebajo, A., and Rashid, I. (Eds). 
      <i>West Africa's Security Challenges: Building Peace in a Troubled Region</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2004. 
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Adebajo, A., and Whiteman, K. (Eds). 
      <i>The EU and Africa: From Eurafrique to Afro-Europa</i>
      . New York, Columbia University Press, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Adebanwi, W. (Ed.). 
      <i>The Political Economy of Everyday Life in Africa: Beyond the Margins</i>
      . Woodbridge, James Currey, 2017.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>Everyday State and Democracy in Africa: Ethnographic Encounters</i>
       Athens, OH, Ohio University Press, 2022.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1474283024" type="FULL">
      Adejumobi, S. (Ed.). 
      <i>Democratic Renewal in Africa: Trends and Discourses</i>
      . New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Adetula, V., Bereketeab, R., and Obi, C. (Eds). 
      <i>Regional Economic Communities and Peacebuilding in Africa: Lessons from ECOWAS and IGAD</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Affi, L., Tønnessen, L., and Tripp, A. M. (Eds). 
      <i>Women &amp; Peacebuilding in Africa</i>
      . Martlesham, Boydell &amp; Brewer, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Agence Française de Développement and Dunod Editeur. 
      <i>Atlas of Africa: New Perspectives on the Continent</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.8" type="FULL">
      Agyeman, O. 
      <i>Africa’s Persistent Vulnerable Link: Global Politics</i>
      . New York, New York University Press, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201597973" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The Failure of Grassroots Pan-Africanism: The Case of the All-African Trade Union Federation.</i>
       Lanham, MD, Lexington Books, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Ahluwalia, P., Bethleham, L., and Ginio, R. (Eds). 
      <i>Violence and Non-Violence in Africa</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.121618092014" type="FULL">
      Airewele, P. S., and Endozie, R. K. 
      <i>Reframing Contemporary Africa: Politics, Economics, and Culture in the Global Era</i>
      . Washington, DC, CQ Press, 2010.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Ajakaiye, D. O., and Oyejide, T. A. (Eds). 
      <i>Trade Infrastructure and Economic Development</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.9" type="FULL">
      Akeya Agnango, G. (Ed.). 
      <i>Issues and Trends in Contemporary African Politics</i>
      . New York, Peter Lang, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Akyeampong, E. K. 
      <i>Independent Africa: The First Generation of Nation Builders</i>
      . Bloomington, IN, Indiana University Press, 2023.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201598024" type="FULL">
      Alao, A. 
      <i>Natural Resources and Conflict in Africa: The Tragedy of Endowment</i>
      . Rochester, NY, University of Rochester Press, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Amoah, M. 
      <i>Nationalism, Globalization, and Africa</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Anderson, D., and Rolandsen, Ø. (Eds). 
      <i>Politics and Violence in Eastern Africa: The Struggles of Emerging States</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2017.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Andrews, N., Khalema, N., and Assié-Lumumba, N. (Eds). 
      <i>Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in Retrospect: Africa's Development Beyond 2015</i>
      . Berlin, Springer, 2015
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1275472835" type="FULL">
      Anseeuw, W., and Alden, C. (Eds). 
      <i>The Struggle over Land in Africa: Conflicts, Politics &amp; Change</i>
      . Cape Town, HSRC Press, 2010.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Arriola, L., Johnson, M., and Phillips, M. (Eds). 
      <i>Women and Power in Africa Aspiring, Campaigning, and Governing</i>
      . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Aryeetey, E., Devarajan, S., Kanbur, R., and Kasekende, L. (Eds). 
      <i>The Oxford Companion to the Economics of Africa</i>
      . Oxford, OUP, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.15" type="FULL">
      Aryeetey, E., and Nissanke, M. 
      <i>Financial Integration and Development: Liberalization and Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa.</i>
       London, Routledge, 1998.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1182868155" type="FULL">
      Asante, M. K. 
      <i>The History of Africa: The Quest for Eternal Harmony</i>
      . London, Routledge, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.16" type="FULL">
      Asante, S. K. 
      <i>Regionism and Africa's Development.</i>
       London, Palgrave Macmillan, 1997.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1474288223" type="FULL">
      Ascher, W., and Mirovitskaya N. (Eds). 
      <i>The Economic Roots of Conflict and Cooperation in Africa (Politics, Economics, and Inclusive Development)</i>
      . New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.18" type="FULL">
      Assensoh, A. B., and Alex-Assensoh, Y. M. 
      <i> African History and Politics</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.19" type="FULL">
      Ayittey, G. B. N. 
      <i>Africa Unchained</i>
      . New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1474287356" type="FULL">
      Bachelard, J. 
      <i>Governance Reform in Africa: International and Domestic Pressures and Counter-Pressures</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Badri, B., and Tripp, A. M. 
      <i>Women's Activism in Africa: Struggles for Rights and Representation</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2017
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.23" type="FULL">
      Bakut, B. T., and Dutt, S. 
      <i> Africa at the Millennium</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2000.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.24" type="FULL">
      Banham, M. (Ed.). 
      <i>Southern Africa</i>
      . Oxford, James Currey, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.135724092013" type="FULL">
      Banini, D. 
      <i>Geopolitical Political Rivalries for Africa's Natural Resources: West and East Collision in Africa.</i>
       Munich, GRIN, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201598528" type="FULL">
      Barrett, C. B., Little, P., and Carter, M. (Eds). 
      <i>Understanding and Reducing Persistent Poverty in Africa</i>
      . London, Routledge, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201598572" type="FULL">
      Bassey, C., and Oshita, O. (Eds). 
      <i>Conflict Resolution, Identity Crisis, and Development in Africa</i>
      . Lagos, Malthouse Press, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.31" type="FULL">
      Bayart, J.-F. 
      <i>The State in Africa: The Politics of the Belly</i>
      . 2nd edn. Cambridge, Polity Press, 2009.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.161506092018" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>État et religion en Afrique</i>
       Paris, Karthala, 2018.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Bekker, S., Croese, S., and Pieterse, E. (Eds).
      <i>Refractions of the National, the Popular and the Global in African Cities</i>
      . Cape Town, African Minds, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.34" type="FULL">
      Belshaw, D., and Livingstone, I. 
      <i>Renewing Development in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . London, Routledge, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Benabdallah, L. 
      <i>Shaping the Future of Power: Knowledge Production and Network-Building in China-Africa Relations</i>
      . Ann Arbour, MI, University of Michigan Press, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Bereketeab, R. (Ed.). 
      <i>The Horn of Africa: Intra-State and Inter-State Conflicts and Security</i>
      . London, Pluto Press, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>Self-Determination and Secession in Africa: The Post-Colonial State</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2014.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>National Liberation Movements as Government in Africa</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2017.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.37" type="FULL">
      Berger, I., and White, E. F. 
      <i>Women in Sub-Saharan Africa: Restoring Women to History</i>
      . Bloomington, IN, Indiana University Press, 1999.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.38" type="FULL">
      Berkeley, B. 
      <i>The Graves Are Not Yet Full: Race, Tribe and Power in the Heart of Africa</i>
      . Oxford, Basic Books, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1474281119" type="FULL">
      Besada, H. G. (Ed.). 
      <i>Governing Natural Resources for Africa's Development</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.42" type="FULL">
      Bhalla, S. S. 
      <i>Imagine There's No Country: Poverty, Inequality and Growth in the Era of Globalization</i>
      . Washington, DC, Institute for International Economics, 2002.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Binns, T., Dixon, A., and Nel, E. 
      <i>Africa: Diversity and Development.</i>
       Abingdon, Routledge, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Bleck, J., and van de Walle, N. (Eds). 
      <i>Electoral Politics in Africa since 1990: Continuity in Change</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.43" type="FULL">
      Birmingham, D. 
      <i>The Decolonization of Africa.</i>
       Athens, OH, Ohio University Press, 1996.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Bond, P. 
      <i>Looting Africa: The Economics of Exploitation</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Booth, D., and Cammack, D. 
      <i>Governance for Development in Africa: Solving Collective Action Problems</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.47" type="FULL">
      Boulden, J. 
      <i>Dealing with Conflict in Africa.</i>
       2nd edn. New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Bowman, M. W. 
      <i>Digital Development in East Africa: The Distribution, Diffusion, and Governance of Information Technology</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2023.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1474287438" type="FULL">
      Brass, J. 
      <i>Allies or Adversaries: NGOs and the State in Africa</i>
      . New York, Cambridge University Press, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Bratton, M. 
      <i>Voting and Democratic Citizenship in Africa</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Brautigam, D. 
      <i>The Dragon’s Gift: The Real Story of China in Africa</i>
      . New York, Oxford University Press, 2010.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Brems, E., Corradi G., and Schotsmans, M. (Eds). 
      <i>International Actors and Traditional Justice in Sub-Saharan Africa: Policies and Interventions in Transitional Justice and Justice Sector Aid</i>
      . Cambridge, Intersentia, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Brett, P., and Gissel, L. E. 
      <i>Africa and the Backlash Against International Courts</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Brioni, S., and Gulema, S. (Eds). 
      <i>The Horn of Africa and Italy: Colonial, Postcolonial and Transnational Cultural Encounters</i>
      . New York, Peter Lang, 2018.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201598726" type="FULL">
      Broadman, H. G. 
      <i>Africa’s Silk Road: China and India’s New Economic Frontier</i>
      . Washington, DC, World Bank Publications, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1474281885" type="FULL">
      Brosig, M. (Ed.). 
      <i>Cooperative Peacekeeping in Africa: Exploring Regime Complexity</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.60" type="FULL">
      Brune, S., et al. 
      <i> Africa and Europe: Relations of Two Continents in Transition</i>
      . Hamburg, LIT Verlag, 1994.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Burgis, T. 
      <i>The Looting Machine: Warlords, Oligarchs, Corporations, Smugglers, and the Theft of Africa's Wealth</i>
      . New York, PublicAffairs, 2015.
      <!--(PublicAffairs sic)-->
          </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.61" type="FULL">
      Calamitsis, E. A. 
      <i>Adjustment and Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . Washington, DC, IMF Publications, 2000.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201598935" type="FULL">
      Calderisi, R. 
      <i>The Trouble with Africa: Why Foreign Aid Isn’t Working</i>
      . New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201598972" type="FULL">
      Carey, K., Gupta, S., and Jacoby, U. 
      <i>Sub-Saharan Africa: Forging New Trade Links with Asia</i>
      . Washington, DC, IMF Publication Services, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.123626092023" type="FULL">
      Carlson, K. B. 
      <i>The Justice Laboratory: International Law in Africa</i>
      . Washington, DC, Brookings Institution Press, 2022.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201599033" type="FULL">
      Carmody, P. 
      <i>Neoliberalism, Civil Society and Security in Africa</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The New Scramble for Africa</i>
      . Cambridge, Polity Press, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The Rise of the BRICS in Africa: The Geopolitics of South-South Relations</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Carmody, P., Kragelund, P., and Reboredo, R. 
      <i>Africa’s Shadow Rise: China and the Mirage of African Economic Development</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Carmody, P., Murphy, J., Grant, R., Owusu, F. 
      <i>The Urban Question in Africa: Uneven Geographies of Transition</i>
      . Hoboken, NJ, Wiley, 2023
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.230920131257" type="FULL">
      Carrier, N., and Klantschnig, G. 
      <i>Africa and the War on Drugs</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.63" type="FULL">
      Chabal, P., et al. 
      <i>A History of Postcolonial Lusophone Africa</i>
      . London, Hurst and Co., 2002.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Chafer, T., and Cumming, G. (Eds). 
      <i>From Rivalry to Partnership?: New Approaches to the Challenges of Africa</i>
      . London, Ashgate Publishing, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Chafer, T., and Keese, A. (Eds). 
      <i>Francophone Africa at Fifty.</i>
       Manchester, Manchester University Press, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Chan, S. 
      <i>African Political Thought: An Intellectual History of the Quest for Freedom</i>
      . London, Hurst &amp; Co., 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.141324092013" type="FULL">
      Chanie, P., and Mihyo, P. (Eds). 
      <i>Thirty Years of Public Sector Reforms in Africa. Selected Country Experiences.</i>
       Kampala, Fountain Publishers, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Charbonneau, B. 
      <i>France and the New Imperialism: Security Policy in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Cheeseman, N. 
      <i>Democracy in Africa: Successes, Failures, and the Struggle for Political Reform</i>
      . New York, Cambridge University Press, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Cheeseman, N. (Ed.) 
      <i>The Oxford Encyclopedia of African Politics.</i>
       Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Cheeseman, N., Lynch, G., and Willis, J. 
      <i>The Moral Economy of Elections in Africa: Democracy, Voting and Virtue</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Cheeseman, N., Anderson, D., and Scheibler, A. (Eds). 
      <i>Routledge Handbook of African Politics</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Cheru, F., and Obi, C. (Eds). 
      <i>The Rise of China and India in Africa: Challenges, Opportunities and Critical Interventions</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2010.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.140023092013" type="FULL">
      Cheru, F., and Modi, R. 
      <i>Agricultural Development and Food Security in Africa</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201599067" type="FULL">
      Chiwandamira, L., and Makaula, M. (Eds). 
      <i>Perspectives on African Governance</i>
      . Cape Town, Institute for Democracy in South Africa, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.67" type="FULL">
      Choucane-Verdier, A. 
      <i>Libéralisation financière et croissance économique: le cas de l'Afrique subsaharienne.</i>
       Paris, L'Harmattan, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Choplin, A. 
      <i>Concrete City: Material Flows and Urbanization in West Africa</i>
      . Chichester, Wiley, 2023.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.68" type="FULL">
      Chrétien, J.-P. 
      <i>The Great Lakes of Africa: 2,000 Years of History</i>
      . New York, Zone, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201599157" type="FULL">
      Christiaensen, L., and Demery, L. 
      <i>Down to Earth: Agriculture and Poverty Reduction in Africa</i>
      . Washington, DC, World Bank Publications, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.69" type="FULL">
      Clapham, C. 
      <i>Africa and the International System: The Politics of State Survival</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1996.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The Horn of Africa: State Formation and Decay</i>
      . London, Hurst &amp; Co., 2017.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Clarke, D. 
      <i>Africa: Crude Continent: The Struggle for Africa's Oil Prize</i>
      . London, Profile Books, 2010.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.114618092012" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>Africa's Future: Darkness to Destiny</i>
      . London, Profile Books, 2014.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.71" type="FULL">
      Clarke, J. F. 
      <i>Political Reform in Francophone Africa</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Westview Press, 1996.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201599207" type="FULL">
      Cole, R., and De Blij, H. J. 
      <i>Survey of Sub-Saharan Africa: A Regional Geography</i>
      . New York, Oxford University Press Inc, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201599544" type="FULL">
      Collins, R. O., and Burns, J. M. 
      <i>A History of Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Cooke, J., and Goldwyn, D. 
      <i>Africa's New Energy Producers: Making the Most of Emerging Opportunities. </i>
       Washington, DC, Center for Strategic &amp; International Studies, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.78" type="FULL">
      Cooper, F. 
      <i>Africa Since 1940: The Past of the Present</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2002.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Coppedge, M., et al (Eds). 
      <i>Varieties of Democracy: Measuring Two Centuries of Political Change</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.80" type="FULL">
      Coquery-Vidrovitch, C. 
      <i>African Women: A Modern History</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Westview Press, 1997.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201599777" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>History of African Cities South of the Sahara</i>
      . Princeton, NJ, Markus Wiener, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.124919092013" type="FULL">
      Cotula, L. 
      <i>The Great African Land Grab?</i>
       London, Zed Books, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.163029032013" type="FULL">
      Coulibaly, S. 
      <i>Coups d'Etat: Légitimation et démocraties en Afrique</i>
      . Paris, L'Harmattan, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.82" type="FULL">
      Cowan, M., and Laakso, L. 
      <i>Multiparty Elections in Africa</i>
      . Oxford, James Currey, 2002.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Cramer, C., Sender, J., and Oqubay, A. (Eds). 
      <i>African Economic Development: Evidence, Theory, Policy</i>
      . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.149" type="FULL">
      Cruise O'Brien, D., et al. (Eds). 
      <i>Contemporary West African States</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1990.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.84" type="FULL">
      Curtin, P., et al. 
      <i>African History</i>
      . London, Longman, 1995.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201599970" type="FULL">
      Dago, F. 
      <i>Politics, Economics and Development in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . Twickenham, Athena Press, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201600013" type="FULL">
      David, J. (Ed.). 
      <i>Africa and the War on Terrorism</i>
      . London, Ashgate Publishing, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.87" type="FULL">
      Davids, Y., et al. 
      <i>Measuring Democracy and Human Rights in Southern Africa</i>
      . Uppsala, Nordic Africa Institute, 2002.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.88" type="FULL">
      Davidson, B. 
      <i>Let Freedom Come</i>
      . Boston, MA, Little, Brown &amp; Co, 1989.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.90" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The Black Man's Burden: Africa and the Curse of the Nation-State</i>
      . Oxford, James Currey, 1992.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.89" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>African Civilization Revisited</i>
      . Trenton, NJ, Africa World Press, 1993.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.91" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>Africa in History: Themes and Outlines</i>
      . London, Simon and Schuster, 1995.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.94" type="FULL">
      Debrun, X., Masson, P. R., and Pattillo, C. A. 
      <i>Monetary Union in West Africa: Who Might Gain, Who Might Lose, and Why?</i>
       Washington, DC, IMF Publication Services, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.95" type="FULL">
      Decalo, S. 
      <i> Coups and Military Rule in Africa: Motivations and Constraints</i>
      . Newhaven, CT, Yale University Press, 1990.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Decker, C., and McMahon, E. 
      <i>The Idea of Development in Africa: A History</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Deegan, H. 
      <i>Africa Today: Culture, Economics, Religion, Security.</i>
       Abingdon, Routledge, 2009.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Dent, C. M. (Ed.). 
      <i>China and Africa Development Relations.</i>
       Abingdon, Routledge, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Derrick, J. 
      <i>Africa’s `Agitators’: Militant Anti-Colonialism in Africa and the West, 1918–1939</i>
      . New York, Columbia University Press, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.240920131436" type="FULL">
      Devereux, S., and Getu, M. (Eds). 
      <i>Informal and Formal Social Protection Systems in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . Kampala, Fountain Publishers, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.93" type="FULL">
      De Waal, A. 
      <i>Famine Crimes: Politics and the Disaster Relief Industry in Africa</i>
      . Oxford, James Currey, 1997.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.163825092013" type="FULL">
      Diakité, T. 
      <i>50 ans après, l'Afrique</i>
       Paris, Arléa, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.100" type="FULL">
      Diamond, L., and Plattner, M. F. (Eds). 
      <i>Nationalism, Ethnic Conflict and Democracy</i>
      . Baltimore, MD, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.101" type="FULL">
      Diawara, M. 
      <i>In Search of Africa</i>
      . Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1998.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.12072007" type="FULL">
      Dibie, R. (Ed.). 
      <i>Non-governmental Organizations and Sustainable Development in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . Lanham, MD, Lexington Books, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Dickovick, J. T., and Wunsch, J. S. (Eds). 
      <i>Decentralization in Africa: The Paradox of State Strength</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2014.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Dinar, A., Hassan, R., Mendelsohn, R., Benhin, J., et al. 
      <i>Climate Change and Agriculture in Africa: Impact Assessment and Adaptation Strategies</i>
      . London, Earthscan, 2008.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.102" type="FULL">
      Diop, M.-C., and Diouf, M. 
      <i>Les Figures du politique en Afrique: Des pouvoirs hérités aux pouvoirs élus.</i>
       Paris, Editions Karthala, 1999.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.103" type="FULL">
      Diouf, M. 
      <i>L'Afrique dans la mondialisation.</i>
       Paris, L'Harmattan, 2002.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.123026092023" type="FULL">
      Döring, K. P. W. 
      <i>African Military Politics in the Sahel: Regional Organizations and International Politics</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Dowden, R. 
      <i>Africa: Altered States, Ordinary Miracles</i>
      . London, Portobello Books, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Doss, A. 
      <i>A Peacekeeper in Africa: Learning from UN Interventions in Other People’s Wars</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Dwyer, M., and Molony, T. (Eds). 
      <i>Social Media and Politics in Africa: Democracy, Censorship and Security</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2019.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Ecker, O. 
      <i>Economics of Micronutrient Malnutrition: The Demand for Nutrients in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . New York, Peter Lang, 2009.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.106" type="FULL">
      Ehui, F. T. 
      <i>L'Afrique noire: De la superpuissance au sous-développement</i>
      . Abidjan, Nouvelles Editions Ivoiriennes, 2002.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Elischer, S. 
      <i>Political Parties in Africa: Ethnicity and Party Formation</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>Salafism and Political Order in Africa.</i>
       Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.108" type="FULL">
      Ellis, S. 
      <i>Africa Now: People, Policies, Institutions</i>
      . Oxford, James Currey, 1996.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.123323092013" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>Seasons of Rains: Africa and the World</i>
      . London, Hurst &amp; Co., 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Endo, M., Neocosmos, M., and Onoma, A.K. (Eds). 
      <i>African Politics of Survival: Extraversion and Informality in the Contemporary World</i>
      . Bamenda, Langaa Research and Publishing Common Initiative Group, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Engel, U., and Gomes Porto, J. 
      <i>Africa's New Peace and Security Architecture (Global Security in a Changing World)</i>
      . London, Ashgate Publishing, 2010.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.109" type="FULL">
      Englebert, P. 
      <i>State Legitimacy and Development in Africa</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2000.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.122623092013" type="FULL">
      Epprecht, M. 
      <i>Sexuality and Social Justice in Africa: Rethinking Homophobia and Forging Resistance</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201600054" type="FULL">
      Estache, A., and Wodon, Q. 
      <i>Infrastructure and Poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . Washington, DC, World Bank Publications, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Everill, B., and Kaplan, J. (Eds). 
      <i>The History and Practice of Humanitarian Intervention and Aid in Africa</i>
      . Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.114" type="FULL">
      Eyene-Mba, J. 
      <i>Afrique sur le chemin de la croissance et de l'évolution</i>
      . Paris, L'Harmattan, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.115" type="FULL">
      Fage, J. (updated by Tordoff, W.). 
      <i>A History of Africa</i>
      . London, Frank Cass, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.116" type="FULL">
      Falola, T. 
      <i>Nationalism and African Intellectuals.</i>
       Rochester, NY, University of Rochester Press, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Falola, T., and Achberger, J. (Eds). 
      <i>The Political Economy of Development and Underdevelopment in Africa</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Falola, T., and Essien, K. 
      <i>Pan-Africanism, and the Politics of African Citizenship and Identity</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Falola, T., and Hamel, N. (Eds). 
      <i>Disability in Africa Inclusion, Care, and the Ethics of Humanity</i>
      . Rochester, NY, University of Rochester Press, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Falola, T., and Kalu, K. 
      <i>Africa and Globalization: Challenges of Governance and Creativity</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2018.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Falola, T., and Mbah, E. 
      <i>Contemporary Africa: Challenges and Opportunities</i>
      . New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Falola, T., and Salau, M. B. (Eds) 
      <i>Africa in Global History A Handbook</i>
      . Berlin, De Gruyter Oldenburg, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1275490336" type="FULL">
      Falola, T., and Usman, A. (Eds). 
      <i>Movements, Borders, and Identities in Africa</i>
      . Rochester, NY, University of Rochester Press, 2009.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Ferguson, J. 
      <i>Global Shadows: Africa in the Neoliberal World Order</i>
      . Durham, NC, Duke University Press, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Finaldi, G. M. 
      <i>Italian National Identity in the Scramble for Africa</i>
      . New York, Peter Lang, 2009.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Fisher. J. 
      <i>East Africa after Liberation: Conflict, Security and the State since the 1980s</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Fisher. J., and Wilén, N. 
      <i>African Peacekeeping</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2022.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201600201" type="FULL">
      Francis, D. J. 
      <i>Uniting Africa: Building Regional Peace and Security Systems</i>
      . London, Ashgate Publishing, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1121707746" type="FULL">
      French, H. W. 
      <i>A Continent for the Taking: The Tragedy and Hope of Africa</i>
      . New York, Alfred A. Knopf, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>China's Second Continent: How a Million Migrants Are Building a New Empire in Africa</i>
      . New York, Alfred A. Knopf, 2014.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>Born in Blackness: Africa, Africans, and the Making of the Modern World, 1471 to the Second World War</i>
      . New York, Liveright, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.118" type="FULL">
      Freund, B. 
      <i>The Making of Contemporary Africa.</i>
       London, Palgrave Macmillan, 1998.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.120" type="FULL">
      Fuller, B. 
      <i>Government Confronts Culture: The Struggle for Local Democracy in Southern Africa</i>
      . London, Garland Science, 1999.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.121" type="FULL">
      Funke, N. 
      <i>The New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD): Opportunities and Challenges</i>
      . Washington, DC, IMF Institute, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Gabay, C., and Death, C. 
      <i>Critical Perspectives on African Politics.</i>
       Abingdon, Routledge, 2014.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.175624092013" type="FULL">
      Gassama, M. (Ed.). 
      <i>50 ans après, quelle indépendance pour l'Afrique?</i>
       Paris, Philippe Rey, 2010.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.115028092016" type="FULL">
      Gbaguidi, N. A. (Ed.). 
      <i>La Réparation du Dommage Ecologique dans l'Espace Francophone: Cas du Bénin, de la Roumanie, du Sénégal et du Togo</i>
      . Paris, L'Harmattan, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Gebissa, E. 
      <i>Leaf of Allah: Khat and Agricultural Transformation.</i>
       Oxford, James Currey, 2005.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.123" type="FULL">
      Geda, A. 
      <i>Finance and Trade in Africa</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.124" type="FULL">
      Ghaia, D. 
      <i>Renewing Social and Economic Progress in Africa</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2000.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Gidron, Y. 
      <i>Israel in Africa Security, Migration, Interstate Politics</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Gil, N., Stafford, A., and Musonda, I. (Eds). 
      <i>Duality by Design: The Global Race to Build Africa's Infrastructure</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2019.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201600237" type="FULL">
      Gilbert, E., and Reynolds, J. 
      <i>Africa in World History</i>
      . 2nd edn. Harlow, Prentice Hall, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Glawion, T. 
      <i>The Security Arena in Africa: Local Order-Making in the Central African Republic, Somaliland, and South Sudan</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Gow, J., Olonisakin, F., and Dijxhoorn, E. (Eds). 
      <i>West African Militancy and Violence</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Grilli, M., and Gerits, F. (Eds). 
      <i>Visions of African Unity: New Perspectives on the History of Pan-Africanism and African Unification Projects</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.122426092023" type="FULL">
      Grishina, N.V. (Ed.). 
      <i>Water Resources of Sub-Saharan Africa: Opportunities and Problems of Use</i>
      . Moscow, Institute for African Studies, 2022.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.128" type="FULL">
      Grosh, B., and Mukandala, R. 
      <i>State-Owned Enterprises in Africa</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1994.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.129" type="FULL">
      Gulliver, P. H. (Ed.). 
      <i>Tradition and Transition in East Africa</i>
      . London, Routledge, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Gumede, W. 
      <i>The Democracy Gap: Africa's Wasted Years</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.130" type="FULL">
      Gunning, J. W., and Oostendorp, R. 
      <i>Industrial Change in Africa</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.105126092023" type="FULL">
      Guerraoui, D. (Ed.). 
      <i>L'Afrique de l'innovation. Politiques nationales et partenariats panafricains</i>
      . Paris, L’Harmattan, 2023.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.132" type="FULL">
      Gyimah-Boadi, E. 
      <i>Democratic Reform in Africa: The Quality of Progress</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Hall, R., Scoones, I., and Tsikata, D. 
      <i>Africa’s Land Rush: Rural Livelihoods and Agrarian Change</i>
      . Woodbridge, James Currey, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.162326092023" type="FULL">
      Harbeson, J. W., and Rothchild, D. (Eds). 
      <i>Africa in World Politics: Sustaining Reform in a Turbulent World Order</i>
      . 7th edn, New York, Routledge, 2023.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Harel, X., and Hofnung, T. 
      <i>Le scandale des biens mal acquis. Enquête sur les milliards volés de la Françafrique</i>
      . Paris, La Découverte, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      de Haas, M., and Frankema, E. (Eds). 
      <i>Migration in Africa Shifting Patterns of Mobility from the 19th to the 21st Century</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2022.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.135" type="FULL">
      Hargreaves, J. D. 
      <i>Decolonization in Africa.</i>
       2nd edn, Abingdon, Routledge, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1474287265" type="FULL">
      Harmon, S. A. 
      <i>Terror and Insurgency in the Sahara-Sahel Region: Corruption, Contraband, Jihad and the Mali War of 2012–2013</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Harms, R. 
      <i>Land of Tears</i>
      . New York, Basic Books, 2019.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201600306" type="FULL">
      Harris, G. (Ed.). 
      <i>Achieving Security in Sub-Saharan Africa: Cost Effective Alternatives to the Military</i>
      . Pretoria, Institute for Security Studies, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.139" type="FULL">
      Havinden, M., and Meredith, D. 
      <i>Colonialism and Development: Britain and its Tropical Colonies</i>
      . London, Routledge, 1993.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201600369" type="FULL">
      Havnevik, K., et al. (Eds). 
      <i>African Agriculture and the World Bank: Development or Impoverishment?</i>
       Uppsala, Nordic Africa Institute, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Heilbrunn, J. R. 
      <i>Oil, Democracy, and Development in Africa.</i>
       New York, Cambridge University Press, 2014.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Hentz, J. J. (Ed.). 
      <i>Routledge Handbook of African Security.</i>
       Abingdon, Routledge, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.140" type="FULL">
      Herbst, J. 
      <i>States and Power in Africa: Comparative Lessons in Authority and Control</i>
      . Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 2000.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.141" type="FULL">
      Herbst, J., and Mills, G. 
      <i>The Future of Africa: A New Order in Sight?</i>
       Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>Africa’s Third Liberation</i>
      . Johannesburg, Penguin, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.142" type="FULL">
      Hiscox, M. J. 
      <i>International Trade and Political Conflict: Commerce, Coalitions and Mobility</i>
      . Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 2002.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.240920131241" type="FULL">
      Hoag, H. J. 
      <i>Developing the Rivers of East and West Africa: An Environmental History</i>
      . London, Continuum Publishing Corpn, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201600445" type="FULL">
      Honohan, P., and Beck, T. 
      <i>Making Finance Work for Africa</i>
      . Washington, DC, World Bank Publications, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.144" type="FULL">
      Hope, K. R., and Chikulo, B. C. 
      <i>Corruption and Development in Africa</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 1999.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      House-Soremekun, B., and Falola, T. 
      <i>Globalization and Sustainable Development in Africa</i>
      . Rochester, NY, University of Rochester Press, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201600550" type="FULL">
      Howe, H. M. 
      <i>Ambiguous Order: Military Forces in African States</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2005.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.146" type="FULL">
      Huband, M. 
      <i>The Skull beneath the Skin: Africa and the Cold War</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Westview Press, 2002.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.147" type="FULL">
      Hugon, P. 
      <i>La zone franc à l'heure de l'Euro</i>
      . Paris, Editions Karthala, 1999.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.148" type="FULL">
      Hyden, G., and Bratton, M. (Eds). 
      <i>Governance and Politics in Africa</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1992.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Jackson, D. R, 
      <i>US Foreign Policy in The Horn of Africa: From Colonialism to Terrorism</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2018.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.156" type="FULL">
      Jackson, R., and Rosberg, C. 
      <i>Personal Rule in Black Africa</i>
      . Berkeley, CA, University of California Press, 1982.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.157" type="FULL">
      Jackson, T. 
      <i>Management and Change in Africa.</i>
       London, Frank Cass, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.164306092018" type="FULL">
      Jacquemot, P. 
      <i>L’Afrique des possibles, les défis de l’émergence</i>
      . Paris, Karthala, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201600587" type="FULL">
      Jamieson, D. T., et al. (Eds). 
      <i>Disease and Mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . 2nd edn. Washington, DC, World Bank Publications, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201600837" type="FULL">
      Janis, M. 
      <i>Africa After Modernism: Transitions in Literature, Media, and Philosophy</i>
      . London, Routledge, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Jarpa Dawuni, J. (Ed.) 
      <i>Gender, Judging and the Courts in Africa.</i>
       Abingdon, Routledge, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Jerven, M. 
      <i>Poor Numbers: How We Are Misled by African Development Statistics and What To Do About It</i>
      . Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>Africa: Why Economists Get it Wrong.</i>
       London, Zed Books, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The Wealth and Poverty of African States: Economic Growth, Living Standards and Taxation since the Late Nineteenth Century.</i>
       Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Juma, C. 
      <i>The New Harvest: Agricultural Innovation in Africa.</i>
       2nd edn. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.159" type="FULL">
      Kabbaj, O. 
      <i>The Challenge of African Development.</i>
       Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.160" type="FULL">
      Kamate, E. 
      <i>Quel développement pour l'Afrique?</i>
       Mali, Editions Jamana, 1997.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201600872" type="FULL">
      Kane, I., and Mbelle, N. 
      <i>Towards a People-Driven African Union: Current Obstacles and New Opportunities</i>
      . Oxford, Oxfam Publishing/Open Society Institute’s Africa Governance Monitoring and Advocacy Project/African Network on Debt and Development, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.162" type="FULL">
      Kayizzi-Mugerwa, S., et al. 
      <i>Towards a New Partnership with Africa</i>
      . Uppsala, Nordic Africa Institute, 2000.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Keller, E. J. 
      <i>Identity, Citizenship, and Political Conflict in Africa</i>
      . Bloomington, IN, University of Indiana Press, 2014.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Kelsall, T. 
      <i>Business, Politics and the State in Africa: Challenging the Orthodoxies on Growth and Transformation</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.121323092013" type="FULL">
      Kemper, S. 
      <i>A Labyrinth of Kingdoms: 10,000 Miles through Islamic Africa</i>
      . New York, W. W. Norton &amp; Co, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Khadiagala, G. (Ed.). 
      <i>War and Peace in Africa's Great Lakes Region</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2017.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Khisa, M., and Day, C. (Eds.). 
      <i>Rethinking Civil-Military Relations in Africa: Beyond the Coup d’État</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2022.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.165" type="FULL">
      Kidanu, A., and Kumssa, A. (Eds). 
      <i>Social Development in Africa</i>
      . Nairobi, United Nations Centre for Regional Development Africa Office, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201600934" type="FULL">
      Kieh, G. K., and Agbese, P. O. (Eds). 
      <i>Reconstituting the State in Africa</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>Reconstructing the Authoritarian State in Africa</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.163626092023" type="FULL">
      Kieh, G. K. and Kalu, K. Jr (Eds). 
      <i>Democratization and Military Coups in Africa: Post-1990 Political Conflicts</i>
      . Lanham, MD, Lexington Books, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.166" type="FULL">
      Kingma, K. 
      <i>Demobilization in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2000.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.141523052012" type="FULL">
      Konaté, M. 
      <i>L’Afrique noire est-elle maudite?</i>
       Paris, Fayard, 2010.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Kornegay, F. A. (Ed.) 
      <i>Africa and the World: Navigating Shifting Geopolitics</i>
      . Johannesburg, Mapungubwe Institute for Strategic Reflection, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.164" type="FULL">
      Koser, K. (Ed.). 
      <i>New African Diasporas.</i>
       London, Routledge, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.168" type="FULL">
      Kouvouama, A. 
      <i>Modernité africaine: Les figures du politique et du religieux</i>
      . Congo, Editions Paari, 2002.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1204277101" type="FULL">
      Kroslak, D. 
      <i>France's Role in the Rwandan Genocide</i>
      . London, Hurst &amp; Co., 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1204276521" type="FULL">
      Kwaa Prah, K. 
      <i>The State of the Nation.</i>
       Cape Town, Centre for Advanced Studies of African Society, 2008.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201600968" type="FULL">
      Lamphear, J. 
      <i>African Military History.</i>
       London, Ashgate Publishing, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Large, D. 
      <i>China and Africa: The New Era</i>
      . Chichester, Wiley, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Lata, L. 
      <i>Peacekeeping As State Building: Current Challenges for the Horn of Africa</i>
      . Trenton, NJ, Africa World Press, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.170" type="FULL">
      Lawrence, P., and Thirtle, C. 
      <i>Africa and Asia in Comparative Economic Perspective</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.172" type="FULL">
      Lebeau, Y., Niane, B., Piriou, A., and de Saint Marie, M. 
      <i>Etat et acteurs émergents en Afrique</i>
      . Paris, Editions Karthala, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Lehman, H. P. 
      <i>Japan and Africa: Globalization and Foreign Aid in the 21st Century</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Lekha Sriram, C., Martin-Ortega, O., and Herman, J. (Eds). 
      <i>Peacebuilding and Rule of Law in Africa: Just Peace?</i>
       Abingdon, Routledge, 2010.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.173" type="FULL">
      Leonard, D. K., and Straus, S. 
      <i>Africa's Stalled Development: International Causes and Cures</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1474287639" type="FULL">
      Levine, D. H. and Nagar, D. (Eds). 
      <i>Region-Building in Africa: Political and Economic Challenges</i>
      . Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.171" type="FULL">
      Le Vine, V. T. 
      <i>Politics in Francophone Africa.</i>
       Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Levitt, J. I. 
      <i>Illegal Peace in Africa: An Inquiry into the Legality of Power Sharing with Warlords, Rebels, and Junta</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.174" type="FULL">
      Lewis, P. 
      <i>Africa: Dilemmas of Development and Change</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Westview Press, 1998.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Linberg, S. I. 
      <i>Democracy and Elections in Africa</i>
      . Baltimore, MD, Johns Hopkins University Press, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1474282364" type="FULL">
      Lombe, M., and Ochumbo, A. (Eds). 
      <i>Children and AIDS: Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Lopes, C. 
      <i>Africa in Transformation: Economic Development in the Age of Doubt</i>
      . Cham, Palgrave Macmillan, 2018.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.125423052012" type="FULL">
      Lugan, B. 
      <i>Décolonisez l'Afrique!</i>
       Paris, Editions Ellipses, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.175" type="FULL">
      Lumumba-Kasongo, T. 
      <i>Political Re-Mapping of Africa: Transnational Ideology and Re-definition of Africa in World Politics.</i>
       Lanham, MD, University Press of America, 1993.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.176" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The Dynamics of Political and Economic Relations between Africa and the Foreign Powers: A Study in International Relations</i>
      . Westport, CT, Praeger, 1998.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.177" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The Rise of Multipartyism and Democracy in the Context of Contemporary Global Change: The Case of Africa.</i>
       Westport, CT, Praeger, 1998.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1275470843" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>Japan-Africa Relations</i>
      . New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2010.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Lumumba-Kasongo, T., Gahama, J. (Eds). 
      <i>Peace, Security and Post-conflict Reconstruction in the Great Lakes Region of Africa</i>
      . Dakar, CODESRIA, 2017.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.178" type="FULL">
      Lundahl, M. (Ed.). 
      <i>From Crisis to Growth in Africa</i>
      . London, Frank Cass, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      McClendon, G. H., and Riedl, R. B. 
      <i>From Pews to Politics: Religious Sermons and Political Participation in Africa</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2019.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.192" type="FULL">
      McDonald, D. (Ed.). 
      <i>On Borders: Perspectives on Internal Migration in Southern Africa</i>
      . New York, St Martin's Press, 2000.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.140824092013" type="FULL">
      Machacek, E. 
      <i>Sustainable Development in Western Anglophone Africa</i>
      . Munich, GRIN, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      McNamee, T., and Muyangwa, M. (Eds). 
      <i>The State of Peacebuilding in Africa: Lessons Learned for Policymakers and Practitioners</i>
      . Cham, Palgrave Macmillan, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.182" type="FULL">
      Magyar, K. P., and Conteh-Morgan, E. 
      <i>Peacekeeping in Africa</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 1998.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.180" type="FULL">
      Mahadevan, V. 
      <i>Contemporary African Politics and Development: A Comprehensive Bibliography, 1981–1990</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1995.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Makgetlaneng, S. 
      <i>Kwame Nkrumah and the Pan-African Ideal: Debates and Contestations</i>
      . Pretoria, Institute for Preservation and Development, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.183" type="FULL">
      Makhan, V. 
      <i>Economic Recovery in Africa.</i>
       London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Makina, D., and Pasura, D. (Eds). 
      <i>Routledge Handbook of Contemporary African Migration</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2023.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Makinda, S. M., and Wafula Okumu, F. (Eds). 
      <i>The African Union: Challenges of Globalization, Security, and Governance</i>
      . London, Routledge, 2009.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.184" type="FULL">
      Mamdami, M., and Wamba dia Wamba, E. 
      <i>African Studies in Social Movements and Democracy</i>
      . Dakar, CODESRIA, 1995.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Mangala, J. 
      <i>New Security Threats and Crises in Africa: Regional and International Perspectives</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Mangala, J. (Ed.). 
      <i>Africa and the European Union: A Strategic Partnership</i>
      . New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.185" type="FULL">
      Manning, P. 
      <i>Francophone Sub-Saharan Africa 1880–1995</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1999.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.124223092013" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The African Diaspora: A History Through Culture</i>
      . New York, Columbia University Press, 2009.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Mano, W. (Ed.). 
      <i>Racism, Ethnicity and the Media in Africa: Mediating Conflict in the Twenty-First Century</i>
      . London, I. B. Tauris, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.141223092013" type="FULL">
      Mapako, M., and Mbewe, A. (Eds). 
      <i>Renewables and Energy for Rural Development in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Mason, R., and Mabon, S. (Eds). 
      <i>The Gulf States and the Horn of Africa: Interests, Influences and Instability</i>
      . Manchester, Manchester University Press, 2022.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.187" type="FULL">
      Masson, P., et al. 
      <i>Monetary Union in West Africa (ECOWAS)</i>
      . Washington, DC, IMF Publications, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.152123092013" type="FULL">
      Matondi, P. B., Havnevik, K., and Beyene, A. 
      <i>Biofuels, Land Grabbing and Food Security in Africa</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Mawere, M., Taranhike, D., and Lessem, R. (Eds). 
      <i>Nhakanomics: Harvesting Knowledge and Value for Re-generation Through Social Innovation.</i>
       Masvingo, Africa Talent Publishers, 2019.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Mawere, M., Chazovachii, B., and Machingura, F. (Eds). 
      <i>COVID-19 and the Dialectics of Global Pandemics In Africa: Challenges, Opportunities and the Future of the Global Economy in the Face of COVID-19</i>
      . Bamenda, Langaa Research and Publishing Common Initiative Group, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Mazama, A. (Ed.). 
      <i>Africa in the 21st Century: Toward a New Future</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Mazibuko, Z. (Ed.). 
      <i>Epidemics and the Health of African Nations.</i>
       Johannesburg, Mapungubwe Institute for Strategic Reflection, 2019.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.195" type="FULL">
      Medard, J.-F. (Ed.). 
      <i>Etats d'Afrique Noire: Formation, mécanismes et crises</i>
      . Paris, Editions Karthala, 1994.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601028" type="FULL">
      Mehler, A., Melber, H., and van Walraven, K. (Eds). 
      <i>Africa Yearbook: Politics, Economy and Society South of the Sahara 2006</i>
      . Leiden, Brill, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Melber, H. 
      <i>The Rise of Africa's Middle Class: Myths, Realities and Critical Engagements</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2017.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.196" type="FULL">
      Melber, H., et al. 
      <i>The New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD): African Perspectives</i>
      . Uppsala, Nordic Africa Institute, 2002.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Mengisteab, K., and Hagg, G. (Eds). 
      <i>Traditional Institutions in Contemporary African Governance</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2017.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Meredith, M. 
      <i>The Fate of Africa: A History of the Continent Since Independence</i>
      . Revised edn. New York, Public Affairs, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.105418092014" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The Fortunes of Africa: A 5,000 Year History of Wealth, Greed and Endeavour</i>
      . London, Simon &amp; Schuster Ltd, 2014.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.198" type="FULL">
      Merlin, P. 
      <i>L'Afrique peut gagner</i>
      . Paris, Editions Karthala, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1210666989" type="FULL">
      Migani, G. 
      <i>La France et l'Afrique sub-saharienne, 1957–1963</i>
      . New York, Peter Lang, 2008.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Mills, G.
      <i>Expensive Poverty: Why Aid Fails and How it Can Work</i>
      . Johannesburg, Pan Macmillan South Africa, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Mills, G., Herbst, J., Obasanjo, O., and Davis, D. 
      <i>Making Africa Work: A Handbook</i>
      . London, Hurst &amp; Co., 2017.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS" type="FULL">
      Mlambo, N. 
      <i>Violent Conflicts, Fragile Peace: Perspectives on Africa’s Security Problems</i>
      . London, Adonis &amp; Abbey Publishers, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Moghalu, K. C. 
      <i>Emerging Africa: How the Global Economy's `Last Frontier' Can Prosper and Matter</i>
      . London, Penguin, 2014.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.201" type="FULL">
      Monga, C. 
      <i>The Anthropology of Anger: Civil Society and Democracy in Africa</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1996.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Monga, C., and Yifu Lin, J. (Eds). 
      <i>The Oxford Handbook of Africa and Economics: Volume 1: Context and Concepts</i>
      . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The Oxford Handbook of Africa and Economics: Volume 2: Policies and Practices</i>
      . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Moorcraft, P. 
      <i>Total Onslaught: War and Revolution in Southern Africa 1945–2018</i>
      . Barnsley, Pen &amp; Sword Military, 2018.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601288" type="FULL">
      Moss, T. J. 
      <i>African Development: Making Sense of the Issues and Actors</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601333" type="FULL">
      Moyo, B. 
      <i>Africa in Global Power Play: Debates, Challenges and Potential Reforms</i>
      . London, Adonis &amp; Abbey Publishers, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1276180657" type="FULL">
      Moyo, D. 
      <i>Dead Aid: Why Aid is Not Working and How There is Another Way for Africa</i>
      . London, Penguin, 2009.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Moyo, I., Nshimbi, C. C., and Laine, J. P (Eds). 
      <i>Migration Conundrums, Regional Integration and Development Africa-Europe Relations in a Changing Global Order</i>
      . Singapore, Springer Nature Singapore, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1121706706" type="FULL">
      Muchie, M. (Ed.). 
      <i>The Making of the African Nation: Pan-Africanism and the African Renaissance</i>
      . London, Adonis &amp; Abbey Publishers, 2005.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.143324092013" type="FULL">
      Mulinge, M. M. and Getu, M. (Eds). 
      <i>Impacts of Climate Change and Variability on Pastoralist Women in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . Kampala, Fountain Publishers, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Munier, N. 
      <i>The Political Economy of the Kimberley Process.</i>
       Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601370" type="FULL">
      Murithi, T. 
      <i>The African Union: Pan-Africanism, Peacebuilding and Development</i>
      . London, Ashgate Publishing, 2005.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Murithi, T. (Ed.). 
      <i>Handbook of Africa's International Relations.</i>
       Abingdon, Routledge, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The Politics of Transitional Justice in the Great Lakes Region of Africa</i>
      . Johannesburg, Fanele, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.150024092013" type="FULL">
      Mwakikagile, G. 
      <i>Africa at the End of the Twentieth Century: What Lies Ahead</i>
      . Dar es Salaam, New Africa Press, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Mwandosya, M. 
      <i>Daraja Juu Ya Mto Nile (Bridge Across the Nile).</i>
       Dar es Salaam, E &amp;D Vision Publishing, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Ncube, M. and Lufumpa, C. (Eds). 
      <i>The Emerging Middle Class in Africa</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2014.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Ndikumana, L., and Boyce, J. K. 
      <i>Africa’s Odious Debts: How Foreign Loans and Capital Flight Bled a Continent</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Ndikumana, L., and Boyce, J. K. (Eds). 
      <i>On the Trail of Capital Flight from Africa: The Takers and the Enablers</i>
      . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2022.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Ndulo, M., and Grieco, M. 
      <i>Failed and Failing States: The Challenges to African Reconstruction</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2010.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601400" type="FULL">
      Ndulu, B. J., et al. 
      <i>The Political Economy of Economic Growth in Africa, 1960–2000</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The Political Economy of Economic Growth in Africa, 1960–2000: Volume 2</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Nhema, A., and Tiyambe Zeleza., P. (Eds). 
      <i>The Roots of African Conflicts: The Causes and Costs</i>
      . Oxford, James Currey, 2008.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The Resolution of African Conflicts: The Management of Conflict Resolution and Post-Conflict Reconstruction</i>
      . Oxford, James Currey, 2008.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Niang, A. 
      <i>The Postcolonial African State in Transition: Stateness and Modes of Sovereignty</i>
      . London, Rowman and Littlefield, 2018.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Niehof, A., Gabriel, R., and Gillespie, S. (Eds). 
      <i>AIDS and Rural Livelihoods: Dynamics and Diversity in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2010.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Noman, A., and Stiglitz, J. E. 
      <i>Industrial Policy and Economic Transformation in Africa</i>
      . New York, Columbia University Press, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.206" type="FULL">
      Nordic Africa Institute. 
      <i>Regionalism and Regional Integration in Africa</i>
      . Uppsala, Nordic Africa Institute, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.163529092023" type="FULL">
      Nubukpo, K. 
      <i>Une solution pour l'Afrique: Du néoprotectionnisme aux biens communs</i>
      . Paris, Éditions Odile Jacob, 2022.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.207" type="FULL">
      Nugent, P. 
      <i>Africa Since Independence</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1121707848" type="FULL">
      Ohaegbelum, F. U. 
      <i>U.S. Policy in Postcolonial Africa: Four Case Studies in Conflict Resolution</i>
      . New York, Peter Lang, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601453" type="FULL">
      Okafor, O. C. 
      <i>The African Human Rights System, Activist Forces and International Institutions</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Okech, A. (Ed.). 
      <i>Gender, Protests and Political Change in Africa.</i>
       Cham, Palgrave Macmillan, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601487" type="FULL">
      Okoth, G. P. (Ed.). 
      <i>Africa at the Beginning of the 21st Century</i>
      . Nairobi, University of Nairobi Press, 2000.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Oladejo, M. T., Okoli-Uwajumogu, N., and Tijani, O. A. (Eds). 
      <i>Social Protection in Africa: A Study of Paradigms and Contexts</i>
       Ibadan, Reamsworth Publishing, 2019.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.218" type="FULL">
      Oliver, R., and Atmore, A. 
      <i>Africa Since 1800</i>
      . 5th edn. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2005.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.219" type="FULL">
      Oliver, R., and Fage, J. D. 
      <i>A Short History of Africa</i>
      . London, Penguin Books, 1988.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.220" type="FULL">
      Olowu, D., and Sako, S. (Eds). 
      <i>Better Governance and Public Policy</i>
      . Bloomsfield, CT, Kumarian Press, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.221" type="FULL">
      Olukoshi, A. 
      <i>The Politics of Opposition in Contemporary Africa</i>
      . Uppsala, Nordic Africa Institute, 1998.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.222" type="FULL">
      Olukoshi, A., and Laakso, L. (Eds). 
      <i>Challenges to the Nation-State in Africa</i>
      . Uppsala, Nordic Africa Institute, 1996.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Olutayo, A., and Adeniran, A. (Eds). 
      <i>Regional Economic Communities : Exploring the Process of Socio-economic Integration in Africa</i>
      . Dakar, CODESRIA, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Omeje, K. (Ed.) 
      <i>Peacebuilding in Contemporary Africa: In Search of Alternative Strategies</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2018.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Onyeiwu, S. 
      <i>Emerging Issues in Contemporary African Economies: Structure, Policy, and Sustainability</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Opalo, K. O. 
      <i>Legislative Development in Africa: Politics and Postcolonial Legacies</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2019.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.162726092023" type="FULL">
      Opongo, E. O. and Murithi, T. (Eds). 
      <i>Elections, Violence and Transitional Justice in Africa</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2022.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Oqubay, A., and Yifu Lin, J. (Eds). 
      <i>China–Africa and an Economic Transformation</i>
      . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2019.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Oshikoya, T. (Ed.). 
      <i>Monetary and Financial Integration in West Africa</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2010.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.120918092014" type="FULL">
      Padayachee, V. (Ed.). 
      <i>The Political Economy of Africa</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2010
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.225" type="FULL">
      Pakenham, T. 
      <i>The Scramble for Africa</i>
      . 2nd edn. Avon Books, New York, 1992.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Paice, E. 
      <i>Youthquake: Why African Demography Should Matter to the World</i>
      . London, Head of Zeus, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Palmer, E. 
      <i>Africa: An Introduction</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.ENTRY.1201601523" type="FULL">
      Parker, J., and Rathbone, R. 
      <i>African History: A Very Short Introduction</i>
      . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Parker, J., and Reid, R. (Eds). 
      <i>The Oxford Handbook of Modern African History</i>
      . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.226" type="FULL">
      Pathe Gueye, S. 
      <i>Du bon usage de la démocratie en Afrique</i>
      . Dakar, Nouvelles Editions Africaines du Sénégal (NEAS), 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601563" type="FULL">
      Patterson, A. S. 
      <i>The African State and the AIDS Crisis</i>
      . London, Ashgate Publishing, 2005.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601603" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>The Politics of AIDS in Africa</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.227" type="FULL">
      Paulson, J. A. 
      <i>African Economies in Transition.</i>
       London, Palgrave Macmillan, 1999.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Peterson, D. 
      <i>Africa's Totalitarian Temptation: The Evolution of Autocratic Regimes</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2019.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601642" type="FULL">
      Pfister, R. 
      <i>Apartheid South Africa and African States: From Pariah to Middle Power, 1961–1994 (International Library of African Studies, Vol. 14)</i>
      . London, I. B. Tauris, 2005.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601697" type="FULL">
      Philips, J. E. (Ed.). 
      <i>Writing African History</i>
      . Rochester, NY, University of Rochester Press, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Pigeaud, F., and Sylla, N. S. 
      <i>Africa's Last Colonial Currency: The CFA Franc Story</i>
      . London, Pluto Press, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Pitcher, M. A. 
      <i>Party Politics and Economic Reform in Africa's Democracies</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Poku, N., and Mdee, A. 
      <i>Politics in Africa: A New Introduction.</i>
       London, Zed Books, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.201309241425" type="FULL">
      Prah, M. 
      <i>Insights into Gender Equity, Equality and Power Relations in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . Kampala, Fountain Publishers, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Prunier, G. 
      <i>Africa's World War: Congo, the Rwandan Genocide, and the Making of a Continental Catastrophe</i>
      . Oxford, Oxford University Publishing, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Radelet, S. 
      <i>Emerging Africa: How 17 Countries Are Leading the Way</i>
      . Washington, DC, Center for Global Development, 2010.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1246369225" type="FULL">
      Raine, S. 
      <i>China's African Challenges.</i>
       London, International Institute For Strategic Studies, 2009.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Ramani, S. 
      <i>Russia in Africa: Resurgent Great Power or Bellicose Pretender?</i>
       London, Hurst &amp; Co., 2022.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.155326092023" type="FULL">
      Ramani, S. 
      <i>Russia in Africa: Resurgent Great Power or Bellicose Pretender?</i>
       Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2023.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601739" type="FULL">
      Rankhumise, S. P., and Mahlako, A. (Eds). 
      <i>Defence, Militarism, Peace Building and Human Security in Africa</i>
      . Pretoria, Africa Institute of South Africa, 2005.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Reid, R. J. 
      <i>A History of Modern Africa: 1800 to the Present.</i>
       Chichester, Wiley-Blackwell, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.231" type="FULL">
      Reno, W. 
      <i>Warlord Politics and African States.</i>
       Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1999.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Resnick, D., and van de Walle, N. (Eds). 
      <i>Democratic Trajectories in Africa: Unravelling the Impact of Foreign Aid</i>
      . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Riedl, R. 
      <i>Authoritarian Origins of Democratic Party Systems in Africa</i>
      . New York, Cambridge University Press, 2014.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Robinson, D. 
      <i>Muslim Societies in African History</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Rossi, B. 
      <i>From Slavery to Aid. Politics, Labour, and Ecology in the Nigerien Sahel, 1800-2000</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Rotberg, R. I. (Ed.). 
      <i>Battling Terrorism in the Horn of Africa.</i>
       Washington, DC, Brookings Institution Press and the World Peace Foundation, 2005.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.200920131844" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>Africa Emerges: Consummate Challenges, Abundant Opportunities</i>
      . Cambridge, Polity, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1275475323" type="FULL">
      Rukato, H. 
      <i>Future Africa: Prospects for Democracy and Development under NEPAD</i>
      . Trenton, NJ, Africa World Press, 2009.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.122223092013" type="FULL">
      Ryan, O. 
      <i>Chocolate Nations: Living and Dying for Cocoa in West Africa</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1121707357" type="FULL">
      Sachs, J. 
      <i>The End of Poverty</i>
      . London, Allen Lane, 2005.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601790" type="FULL">
      Salih, M. A. (Ed.). 
      <i>African Political Parties: Evolution, Institutionalisation and Governance</i>
      . Sterling, VA, Pluto Press, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.239" type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>African Parliaments: Between Governance and Government</i>
      . Cape Town, Human Sciences Research Council Press, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.240" type="FULL">
      Sall, A. (Ed.). 
      <i>Africa 2025: What Possible Futures for Sub-Saharan Africa?</i>
       Pretoria, Unisa Press, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601851" type="FULL">
      Saul, J. S. 
      <i>Decolonization and Empire: Contesting the Rhetoric and Reality of Resubordination in Southern Africa.</i>
       London, The Merlin Press, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Saunders, C., Dzinesa, G., and Nagar, D. (Eds). 
      <i>Region-building in Southern Africa: Progress, Problems and Prospects</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Schomerus, M. 
      <i>The Lord’s Resistance Army Violence and Peacemaking in Africa</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Schouten, P. 
      <i>Roadblock Politics: The Origins of Violence in Central Africa</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2022.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.242" type="FULL">
      Schraeder, P. 
      <i>African Politics and Society: A Mosaic in Transformation</i>
      . Boston, MA, Wadsworth, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.127" type="FULL">
      Schraeder, P. (Ed). 
      <i>Understanding Contemporary Africa</i>
      . 6th edn. Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.243" type="FULL">
      Schwab, P. 
      <i>Africa: A Continent Self-Destructs.</i>
       London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.244" type="FULL">
      Scoones, M., and Wolmer, W. 
      <i>Pathways of Change in Africa</i>
      . Oxford, James Currey, 2002.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.247" type="FULL">
      Sherwood, M., and Adi, H. 
      <i>Pan-African History.</i>
       London, Frank Cass, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.248" type="FULL">
      Shillington, K. 
      <i>History of African</i>
      . 4th edn. London, Red Globe Press, 2018.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.161726092023" type="FULL">
      Shinn, D. H. and Eisenman, J. 
      <i>China's Relations with Africa: A New Era of Strategic Engagement</i>
      . New York, Columbia University Press, 2023.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.249" type="FULL">
      Shorter, A. 
      <i>East African Societies</i>
      . London, Frank Cass, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Siebels, D. 
      <i>Maritime Security in East and West Africa: A Tale of Two Regions</i>
      . Cham, Palgrave Pivot, 2019.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.250" type="FULL">
      Sindayigaya, J.-M. 
      <i>Mondialisation: Le nouvel esclavage de l'Afrique</i>
      . Paris, L'Harmattan, 2000.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.255" type="FULL">
      Skard, T. 
      <i>Continent of Mothers, Continent of Hope: Understanding and Promoting Development in Africa Today</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Smith, G. 
      <i>Where Credit Is Due. How Africa’s Debt Can Be a Benefit, Not a Burden</i>
      . London, Hurst &amp; Co., 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601904" type="FULL">
      Smith, M. S. 
      <i>Beyond the `African Tragedy’: Discourses on Development and the Global Economy</i>
      . London, Ashgate Publishing, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601937" type="FULL">
      Soares, B. (Ed.). 
      <i>Islam and Muslim Politics in Africa</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Söderbaum, F., and Tavares, R. (Eds). 
      <i>Regional Organizations in African Security</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Solhjell , R. 
      <i>Dimensions of African Statehood: Everyday Governance and Provision of Public Goods</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2019.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Solomon, H. 
      <i>Terrorism and Counter-Terrorism in Africa: Fighting Insurgency from Al Shabaab, Ansar Dine and Boko Haram</i>
      . Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2015.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201601966" type="FULL">
      Souare, I. K. 
      <i>Africa in the United Nations System, 1945–2005</i>
      . London, Adonis &amp; Abbey Publishers, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1275478733" type="FULL">
      Souare, I. K. (Ed.). 
      <i>Electoral Violence and Post-Electoral Arrangements in Africa (African Renaissance, Vol. 5, Nos 3–4)</i>
      . London, Adonis &amp; Abbey Publishers, 2009.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Southall, R. 
      <i>Liberation Movements in Power: Party and State in Southern Africa</i>
      . Woodbridge, James Currey, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.ENTRY.1201602003" type="FULL">
      Southall, R., and Melber, H. (Eds). 
      <i>Legacies of Power: Leadership Change and Former Presidents in African Politics.</i>
       Cape Town, Human Sciences Research Council Press, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.20092013" type="FULL">
      Soyinka, W. 
      <i>Of Africa</i>
      . New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Sparks, D. (Ed.) 
      <i>The Blue Economy in Sub-Saharan Africa: Working for a Sustainable Future</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1474282844" type="FULL">
      Sriram, C. S., Martin-Ortega, O., and Herman, J. (Eds). 
      <i>Peacebuilding and Rule of Law in Africa: Just Peace?</i>
       Abingdon, Routledge, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Stapleton, J. 
      <i>Africa: War and Conflict in the Twentieth Century.</i>
       Abingdon, Routledge, 2018.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.258" type="FULL">
      Stock, R. 
      <i>Africa South of the Sahara</i>
      . London, Frank Cass, 1995.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1474282684" type="FULL">
      Stolte, C. 
      <i>Brazil's Africa Strategy: Role Conception and the Drive for International Status</i>
      . New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2016.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.259" type="FULL">
      Subramanian, A. 
      <i>Africa's Trade Revisited.</i>
       Washington, DC, IMF Publications, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.260" type="FULL">
      Suttner, R. (Ed.). 
      <i>Africa in the New Millennium.</i>
       Uppsala, Nordic Africa Institute, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Tadele, G., and Kloos, H. (Eds). 
      <i>Vulnerabilities, Impacts and Responses to HIV/AIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Taiwo, O. 
      <i>Against Decolonisation: Taking African Agency Seriously</i>
      . London, Hurst &amp; Co., 2022.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Taylor, I. 
      <i>The Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC)</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>Africa Rising? BRICS—Diversifying Dependency.</i>
       Woodbridge, James Currey, 2014.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
               <i>African Politics: A Very Short Introduction.</i>
       Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2018
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.261" type="FULL">
      Taylor, I., and Williams, P. (Eds). 
      <i>Africa in International Politics</i>
      . London, Routledge, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Teferra, D. (Ed.). 
      <i>Funding Higher Education in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Themnér, A. (Ed.). 
      <i>Warlord Democrats in Africa: Ex-Military Leaders and Electoral Politics</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2017.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.262" type="FULL">
      Thomas, C., and Wilkin, P. (Eds). 
      <i>Globalization, Human Security and the African Experience</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1999.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.263" type="FULL">
      Thomson, A. 
      <i>An Introduction to African Politics.</i>
       London, Routledge, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Thurston, A. 
      <i>Jihadists of North Africa: Local Politics and Rebel Groups</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.230920131128" type="FULL">
      Tilley, H. 
      <i>Africa as a Living Laboratory: Empire, Development, and the Problem of Scientific Knowledge, 1870–1950.</i>
       Chicago, IL, The University of Chicago Press, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Tiyambe Zeleza, P. 
      <i>Africa and the Disruptions of the Twenty-First Century</i>
      . Dakar, CODESRIA, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.266" type="FULL">
      Tordoff, W. 
      <i>Government and Politics in Africa.</i>
       Basingstoke, Macmillan, 1997.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.267" type="FULL">
      Totte, M., Dahou, T., and Billaz, R. 
      <i>La décentralisation en Afrique de l'Ouest</i>
      . Paris, Editions Karthala, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Turshen, M. 
      <i>Gender and the Political Economy of Conflict in Africa: The Persistence of Violence</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2017
      
      .
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.121926092023" type="FULL">
      Traoré, M. O. 
      <i>Slavery, Resistance, and Identity in Early Modern West Africa</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2023.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1277198598" type="FULL">
      Tvedt, T. 
      <i>The River Nile in the Post-Colonial Age</i>
      . London, I. B. Tauris, 2009.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.268" type="FULL">
      Twaddle, M. 
      <i>The Making of Modern Africa: 1787 to the Present</i>
      . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2004.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201602202" type="FULL">
      Udogu, E. I. 
      <i>African Renaissance in the Millennium: The Political, Social and Economic Discourses on the Way Forward</i>
      . Lanham, MD, Lexington Books, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Utas, M. (Ed.). 
      <i>African Conflicts and Informal Power: Big Men and Networks</i>
      . London, Zed Books, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201598894" type="FULL">
      Van Buuren, M., et al. (Eds). 
      <i>State Recognition and Democratization in Sub-Saharan Africa: A New Dawn for Traditionalist Authorities?</i>
       London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Van Eerd, J. 
      <i>The Quality of Democracy in Africa: Opposition Competitiveness Rooted in Legacies of Cleavages</i>
      . Cham, Springer International Publishing, 2017.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Van Reisen, M., Mawere, M., Stokmans, M., and Gebre-Egziabher, K. (Eds). 
      <i>Roaming Africa: Migration, Resilience and Social Protection.</i>
       Bamenda, Langaa Research and Publishing Common Initiative Group, 2019.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.270" type="FULL">
      Van de Walle, N. 
      <i>African Economies and the Politics of Permanent Crisis, 1979–1999</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2001.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Venter, A. 
      <i>Portugal's Guerrilla Wars in Africa: Lisbon's Three Wars in Angola, Mozambique and Portuguese Guinea 1961-74</i>
      . Solihull, Helion &amp; Co, 2017.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Villalón, L. A. (Ed). 
      <i>The Oxford Handbook of the African Sahel</i>
      . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Villalón, L. A., and Idrissa, R. (Eds). 
      <i>Democratic Struggle, Institutional Reform, and State Resilience in the African Sahel</i>
      . Lanham, MD, Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2020.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201602234" type="FULL">
      Wallerstein, I. 
      <i>Africa: The Politics of Independence and Unity</i>
      . Lincoln, NE, University of Nebraska Press, 2006.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Warner, J.,Cummings, C., Nsaibia, H., and O’Farrell, R. 
      <i>The Islamic State in Africa The Emergence, Evolution, and Future of the Next Jihadist Battlefront</i>
       London, Hurst &amp; Co., 2021.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Weinreb, A., and Trinitapoli, J. 
      <i>Religion and AIDS in Africa.</i>
       New York, Oxford University Press, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Whitaker, B. E., and Clark, J. F. 
      <i>Africa’s International Relations: Balancing Domestic and Global Interests</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2018.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.120823092013" type="FULL">
      Whitehouse, B. 
      <i>Migrants and Strangers in an African City: Exile, Dignity, Belonging</i>
      . Bloomington, IN, Indiana University Press, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Williams, P. D. 
      <i>War and Conflict in Africa</i>
      . Cambridge, Polity Press, 2011.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.275" type="FULL">
      Wills, A. J. 
      <i>An Introduction to the History of Central Africa</i>
      . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1985.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Wilson, Z. 
      <i>The United Nations and Democracy in Africa: Labyrinths of Legitimacy</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2009.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.278" type="FULL">
      Wohlgemuth, L., et al. 
      <i>Institution Building and Leadership in Africa</i>
      . Uppsala, Nordic Africa Institute, 1998.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201602265" type="FULL">
      Wood, G., and Brewster, C. 
      <i>Industrial Relations in Africa</i>
      . London, Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Woodward, P. 
      <i>Crisis in the Horn of Africa: Politics, Piracy and the Threat of Terror</i>
      . London, I. B. Tauris, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.281" type="FULL">
      World Economic Forum. 
      <i>The Africa Competitiveness Report 2009</i>
      . Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2009.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.282" type="FULL">
      Yalae, P. 
      <i>The Road to a New Africa: An Essay to the African People</i>
      . New York, Random House Ventures, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Ylönen, A. and Záhořík, J. (Eds). 
      <i>The Horn of Africa since the 1960s: Local and International Politics Intertwined.</i>
       Abingdon, Routledge, 2017.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.283" type="FULL">
      Young, C. 
      <i>The Postcolonial State in Africa: Fifty Years of Independence, 1960–2010</i>
      . Madison, WI, University of Wisconsin Press, 2012.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.284" type="FULL">
      Young, T. (Ed.). 
      <i>Readings in African Politics.</i>
       Bloomington, IN, Indiana University Press, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Zajontz, T., Carmody, P., Bagwandeen, M., and Leysens, A. (Eds). 
      <i>Africa’s Railway Renaissance: The Role and Impact of China</i>
      . Abingdon, Routledge, 2023.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.285" type="FULL">
      Zartman, W., et al. 
      <i>Europe and Africa: The New Phase</i>
      . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1992.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.1201602358" type="FULL">
      Zeilig, L. 
      <i>Revolt and Protest: Student Politics and Activism in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
      . London, I. B. Tauris, 2007.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry type="FULL">
      Zeilig, L., Samba Sylla, N., and Bianchini, P. (Eds). 
      <i>Revolutionary Movements in Sub-Saharan Africa: An Untold Story</i>
      . London, Pluto Press, 2023.
    </bibl-entry>
          <bibl-entry id="ASS.BOOKS.264" type="FULL">
      Zeleza, P. T., and Eyoh, D. (Eds). 
      <i>Encyclopedia of Twentieth-Century African History</i>
      . London, Routledge, 2003.
    </bibl-entry>
     </bibl-list>
</bibl-section>