<?xml version="1.0"?>
<intro-survey id="AO.IS" id-root="ao.is" iso="ao" original-filename="agoinsu.rtf" usage="ewyb" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
     <country-head>Angola</country-head>
     <is-section id="AO.IS.1" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
          <heading>Introductory Survey</heading>
          <is-section id="AO.IS.2" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
               <heading>Location, Climate, Language, Religion, Flag, Capital</heading>
               <p id="AO.IS.3">The Republic of Angola lies on the west coast of Africa. The province of Cabinda is separated from the rest of the country by the estuary of the River Congo and territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC—formerly Zaire), with the Republic of the Congo lying to its north. Angola is bordered by the DRC to the north, Zambia to the east and Namibia to the south. The climate is tropical, locally tempered by altitude. There are two distinct seasons (wet and dry) but little seasonal variation in temperature. It is very hot and rainy in the coastal lowlands, but temperatures are lower inland. The official lan­guage is Portuguese, but African languages (the most widely spoken being Umbundu, Lunda, Kikongo, Chokwe and Kwanyama) are also in common use. Much of the population follows traditional African beliefs, although a majority profess to be Christians, mainly Roman Catholics. The flag (proportions 2 by 3) has two equal horizontal stripes, of red and black; superimposed in the centre, in gold, are a five-pointed star, half a cog-wheel and a machete. The capital is Luanda.</p>
          </is-section>
          <is-section id="AO.IS.4" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
               <heading>Contemporary Political History</heading>
               <is-section sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                    <heading>Historical Context</heading>
                    <p id="AO.IS.5">Formerly a Portuguese colony, Angola became an overseas province in 1951. African nationalist groups began to form in the 1950s and 1960s, including the Movimento Popular de Libertação de Angola (MPLA), the Frente Nacional de Libertação de Angola (FNLA) and the União Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA). Severe repression followed an unsuccessful nationalist rebellion in 1961, but from 1966 nationalist guerrilla groups were able to establish military and political control in much of eastern Angola and to press westward. Following the April 1974 coup in Portugal, Angola’s right to independence was recognized.</p>
                    <p id="AO.IS.6">In January 1975 a transitional Government was established, comprising representatives of the MPLA, the FNLA, UNITA and the Portuguese Government. However, following violent clashes between the MPLA and the FNLA, by mid-1975 control of Angola was effectively divided between the three major nationalist groups, each aided by foreign powers. The MPLA (which held the capital) was supported by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Cuba, the FNLA by Zaire and Western powers (including the USA), while UNITA was backed by South African forces. The FNLA and UNITA together fought the MPLA.</p>
                    <p id="AO.IS.7">The Portuguese Government proclaimed Angola independent from 11 November 1975, transferring sovereignty to `the Angolan people’ rather than to any liberation movement. The MPLA proclaimed the People’s Republic of Angola in Luanda under the presidency of Dr Agostinho Neto. The FNLA and UNITA proclaimed the Democratic People’s Republic of Angola, based in Nova Lisboa (renamed Huambo). By February 1976, however, the MPLA, aided by Cuban technical and military expertise, effectively controlled the whole country.</p>
               </is-section>
               <is-section sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                    <heading>Domestic Political Affairs</heading>
                    <p id="AO.IS.9">Neto died in September 1979, and José Eduardo dos Santos was elected party leader and President by the Movimento Popular de Libertação de Angola—Partido do Trabalho (MPLA—PT, as the MPLA had been renamed in December 1977). Elections to the Assembleia Popular (People’s Assembly) were first held in 1980.</p>
                    <p id="AO.IS.10">Despite the MPLA—PT Government’s recovery programme, UNITA conducted guerrilla activities, mainly in southern and central Angola, throughout the 1980s. In addition, South African troops frequently crossed the Angolan border with Na­mibia, ostensibly in pursuit of guerrilla forces belonging to the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), which was supported by the Angolan Government. UNITA was excluded from major peace negotiations between Angola, Cuba and South Africa (with unofficial US mediation), which began in May 1988. By July the participants had agreed the principles of a peace settlement that provided for Namibian independence, the discontinuation of South African military support for UNITA and the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola. Following the conclusion of the New York accords on Angola and Namibia in December, the United Nations (UN) Security Council established the UN Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM) to verify the phased withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola, which was completed in May 1991.</p>
                    <p id="AO.IS.13">In October 1990 the MPLA—PT proposed reforms, including the replacement of the party’s official Marxist-Leninist ideology with a commitment to `democratic socialism’, the legalization of politi­cal parties the introduction of a market economy, a revision of the Constitution and the holding of multi-party elections. In March 1991 the People’s Assembly authorized the formation of political parties.</p>
                    <p id="AO.IS.14">On 1 May 1991 the Government and UNITA concluded a peace agreement in Estoril, Portugal, which provided for a ceasefire from 15 May; both parties ratified the accord in the Portuguese capital, Lisbon, on 31 May. The UN Security Council agreed to establish UNAVEM II, with a mandate to ensure its implementation. A new national army of 50,000 men was to be established, comprising equal numbers of government and UNITA soldiers, while free and democratic elections were to be held by the end of 1992.</p>
                    <p id="AO.IS.17">Representatives of the Government and 26 political parties met in Luanda in January 1992 to discuss the transition to multi-party democracy. It was agreed in February that the elections would be conducted on the basis of proportional representation, with the President elected for a five-year term, renewable for a maximum of three terms. The legislature would be elected for a four-year term. In April the People’s Assembly voted to create an Assembleia Nacional (National Assembly) com­prising 223 members (90 to be elected in 18 provincial constitu­encies and the remainder from national lists).</p>
                    <p id="AO.IS.18">In April 1992 the Tribunal da Relação (Court of Appeal) approved UNITA’s registration as a political party. In May the MPLA—PT reverted to its original name. The Constitution was further revised in August, removing the remnants of Angola’s former Marxist ideology, and deleting the words `People’s’ and `Popular’ from the names of official institutions. The country was thus renamed the Republic of Angola.</p>
                    <p id="AO.IS.19">In September 1992 in Cabinda province, the enclave that provides most of Angola’s petroleum revenue, secessionist groups, notably the Frente para a Libertação do Enclave de Cabinda (FLEC), intensified attacks on government troops. In that month government and UNITA forces were formally disbanded, and the new national army, the Forças Armadas de Angola (FAA), was established.</p>
                    <p id="AO.IS.20">Presidential and legislative elections were held on 29–30 September 1992. When preliminary results indicated an MPLA victory in the elections to the National Assembly, the UNITA leader, Dr Jonas Savimbi, accused the Government of electoral fraud and withdrew his troops from the FAA. The presidential election went to a second round between dos Santos and Savimbi, with Savimbi agreeing to participate on condition that this round be conducted by the UN. However, the Government insisted that the election should only take place once UNITA had satisfied the conditions of the Estoril peace agreement by transferring its troops to assembly points or to the FAA.</p>
                    <is-section sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                         <heading>Post-election Conflict</heading>
                         <p id="AO.IS.21">By the end of October 1992, following the release of the official election results, hostilities had spread throughout Angola, with most of UNITA’s demobilized soldiers returning to arms. In November Savimbi agreed to abide by the results, despite maintaining that the ballot had been fraudulent. On 26 November, when the new National Assembly was inaugurated, delegations from the Government and UNITA jointly accepted the validity of the Estoril peace agreement and the intention to implement a nationwide ceasefire. However, UNITA’s 70 elected deputies failed to attend the inauguration, and at the end of November hostilities broke out in the north of the country.</p>
                         <p id="AO.IS.25">In September 1994 the UN Se­curity Council extended the mandate of UNAVEM II until 31 October. Talks during October concentrated on the issue of Savimbi’s security and the replacement of the joint political and military commission with a new joint commission; this would be chaired by the UN Secretary-General’s special representative and comprise government and UNITA representatives, as well as observers from the USA, the Russian Federation and Portugal. A peace accord was formally signed on 20 November. However, hostilities continued beyond the ceasefire date of 22 November, which prevented deployment of the new UNAVEM III peacekeeping mission, created by the Security Council in February 1995.</p>
                         <p id="AO.IS.27">In May 1995 dos Santos and Savimbi ratified a peace accord, following direct talks in Lusaka, Zambia. Savimbi recognized dos Santos as Angola’s President and pledged his full co-operation in the reconstruction of the nation. In July the Assembly approved the creation of two new vice-presidential positions, with one to be offered to Savimbi if he disbanded UNITA forces. In September the UN confirmed that 4,000 UNAVEM III personnel had been deployed.</p>
                         <p id="AO.IS.30">Following discussions in Libreville, Gabon, in March 1996, dos Santos and Savimbi agreed to establish a government of national unity, in accordance with the Lusaka accord. Savimbi proposed UNITA nominees, while dos Santos formally invited Savimbi to assume the vice-presidency. Agreement was also reached on the formation of a unified national army. In May the Government and a Cabinda secessionist faction, FLEC—Forças Armadas Cabindesas (FLEC—FAC), signed a deal outlining the principles of a ceasefire. However, following renewed fighting between government troops and the secessionists, the leader of FLEC—FAC, N’Zita Henriques Tiago, declared that a definitive ceasefire would only follow the FAA’s withdrawal from Cabinda.</p>
                         <p id="AO.IS.32">In November 1996 the National Assembly adopted a constitutional revision extending its mandate for up to four years, pending the establishment of suitable conditions for holding free and fair elections. In April 1997 Savimbi was accorded the special status of official `leader of the opposition’. On 11 April the new Government of National Unity and Reconciliation was inaugurated in Luanda; as envisaged, UNITA assumed a number of ministerial portfolios. UNAVEM III was discontinued on 30 June and replaced by a scaled-down mission, the UN Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA), with a seven-month mandate to oversee implementation of the remaining provisions of the Lusaka accord.</p>
                    </is-section>
                    <is-section sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                         <heading>Protracted Peace Attempts</heading>
                         <p id="AO.IS.36">UNITA’s continued failure to meet its obligations under the peace accord led the UN Security Council to implement additional sanctions against the movement in October 1997. During subsequent months UNITA ceded further territory to state administration, including the important Cuango valley diamond mines in Lunda-Norte province.</p>
                         <p id="AO.IS.37">A new schedule was agreed for the implemen­tation of the Lusaka protocol in January 1998. In March UNITA announced the disbandment of its remaining forces, following which it received official recognition as a legally constituted party. However, allegations persisted that UNITA was preparing for a resumption of hostilities. By June fighting had spread to 14 of Angola’s 18 provinces, displacing some 150,000 people. In August UNITA accused the observer countries in the joint commission of pro-Government bias and stopped negotiating with them. On 31 August the Government suspended UNITA’s ministerial and parliamentary representatives from office.</p>
                         <p id="AO.IS.38">In September 1998 five UNITA moderates issued a manifesto declaring the suspension of Savimbi and the introduction of an interim UNITA leadership, pending a general party congress. Although the group, which styled itself UNITA—Renovada (UNITA—R), commanded very limited support among UNITA’s leaders in Luanda, the Government recognized UNITA—R as the sole and legitimate representative of UNITA in negotiations concerning the implementation of the Lusaka peace process. The UN Security Council maintained that a dialogue between dos Santos and Savimbi was the only solution to the conflict. In late September the Government overturned the suspension of UNITA’s representatives in the Government and legislature, and in October the National Assembly revoked Savimbi’s special status. In that month UNITA—R failed to impose its candidate to lead the UNITA parliamentary group when Abel Chivukuvuku was overwhelmingly re-elected as its Chairman. Chivukuvuku, while no longer claiming allegiance to Savimbi, was opposed to UNITA—R and subsequently formed his own wing of UNITA.</p>
                         <p id="AO.IS.40">In an effort to address the prevailing military and economic crisis, in January 1999 dos Santos assumed the role of Prime Minister. In February the UN Security Council voted unanimously to end MONUA’s mandate by 20 March, stating that UN personnel were no longer able to function. In October the UN and the Government agreed to establish a 30-member `follow-up’ mission, the UN Office in Angola (UNOA), with a focus on humanitarian assistance and human rights.</p>
                         <p id="AO.IS.48">In February 2002 Savimbi was killed during an ambush by FAA soldiers in Moxico province. In March the Government halted military offensives against UNITA, and both parties signed a memorandum of understanding to end the civil war. On 4 April a ceasefire agreement was ratified, in which UNITA accepted the Lusaka protocol and agreed to the cantonment of its soldiers. Some 5,000 UNITA soldiers were to be integrated into the FAA, and UNITA representatives were to take up positions in all levels of government.</p>
                         <p id="AO.IS.49">An estimated 85,000 UNITA soldiers and 300,000 family members had registered in quartering camps by the end of July 2002, and in early August UNITA announced that its military wing had been disbanded. Also in August the UN Security Council established the UN Mission in Angola (UNMA) to succeed UNOA until 15 February 2003. On 23 August 2002 the Government and UNITA set a 45-day deadline for the full implementation of the Lusaka protocol, which was to be monitored by a UN-led joint commission, comprising representatives of the Government, UNITA and the observer countries. In October the inauguration of a new national political commission for UNITA, including former members of UNITA—R, marked the official reunification of the party.</p>
                         <p id="AO.IS.51">By mid-2003 it appeared that Cabinda had been largely pacified. In September 2004 the merger was announced of FLEC—FAC and its rival faction, FLEC—Renovada (FLEC—R). The new grouping, which adopted the name FLEC, was led by Tiago, while António Bento Bembe, previously the President of FLEC—R, became Secretary-General.</p>
                    </is-section>
                    <is-section sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                         <heading>Towards Constitutional Reform</heading>
                         <p id="AO.IS.53">In December 2002 Fernando (Nando) da Piedade Dias dos Santos, hitherto Minister of the Interior, replaced President dos Santos as Prime Minister. A reorganized Council of Ministers included four UNITA representatives. Shortly afterwards the UN Security Council lifted all remaining sanctions on UNITA, having previously removed travel restrictions on officials of the former rebel group. Meanwhile, a Constitutional Commission (established by the National Assembly in 1998) was considering proposals for a new draft constitution. Significantly, in January 2003 the Commission agreed that the President of the Republic would remain Head of Government, as favoured by MPLA deputies; UNITA had advocated the devolvement of executive power to the Prime Minister. In February UNMA withdrew from Angola, as scheduled. By November around 80,000 former UNITA soldiers had been demobilized.</p>
                         <p id="AO.IS.56">In January 2004 the Constitutional Commission was presented with a draft constitution. In mid-2004 the Government, which had identified 14 `key tasks’ it wished to accomplish before holding concurrent presidential and legislative elections, stated that polls would not take place until late 2006. In November 2004 the Commission was dissolved, after a draft constitutional bill had been presented to the National Assembly. In July 2005 the Court of Appeal ruled that President dos Santos was eligible to stand for re-election, and in August dos Santos enacted legislation providing for the creation of a Comissão Nacional Eleitoral (CNE—National Electoral Commission).</p>
                         <p>A peace agreement was signed with FLEC in August 2006, recognizing Cabinda as part of Angola but granting it special status, with a greater degree of autonomy than other provinces. Human rights organizations alleged that this deal had been imposed by force, and members of the Fórum Cabindês para o Diálogo (FCD) and FLEC claimed that Bembe, with whom the agreement had been reached, was not a valid spokesman. In August 2007 President dos Santos announced further steps to consolidate peace, appointing a number of FCD members to positions in government.</p>
                         <p>
            On 5–6 September 2008 a total of 14 political parties contested the first legislative elections to take place in Angola for 16 years. The ruling MPLA secured 81.6% of the valid votes cast, equating to 191 of the 220 seats in the National Assembly. UNITA became the second largest party in the legislature, with 10.4% of the vote and 16 seats. The remaining seats were taken by the Partido de Renovação Social (PRS—eight), the FNLA (three) and the Nova Democracia—União Eleitoral (ND—UE, two). Voter turnout was around 87.4%. Observers from the 
            <xr pageref="Y" ref="WB02047.IO.TXT">European Union (EU)</xr>
             noted organizational problems and declared that, owing to state control of the media, the election fell short of international standards. In late September the MPLA Governor of Huambo province, António Paulo Kassoma, was appointed Prime Minister; the following month a new Government was named.
          </p>
                         <p>In October 2009 three different versions of the draft constitution were made available for a public consultation process. While opposition parties sought a clause providing for the direct popular election of the President, the MPLA secured its preferred constitutional document (which advocated the selection of the President by the largest parliamentary party) due to its overwhelming majority in both the National Assembly and the Tribunal Constitucional (Constitutional Court).</p>
                         <p>The National Assembly approved the text of the new constitution in late January 2010. After minor amendments were made by the Constitutional Court, on 5 February President dos Santos officially promulgated the new basic law. According to the Constitution, the presidency was henceforth to be assumed by the leader of the political party, or coalition of parties, obtaining the majority of votes in legislative elections. The President, who was to be both Head of State and Head of Government, could serve a maximum of two five-year terms. The 223 members of the National Assembly were also to serve five-year terms concurrent with that of the President. The position of Prime Minister was abolished and a Vice-President (the deputy leader of the ruling party) was to be appointed. The new Constitution also outlawed the death penalty. On 6 February dos Santos formed a new Government; former Prime Minister Nando dos Santos became Vice-President.</p>
                    </is-section>
                    <is-section sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                         <heading>The 2012 Legislative Elections</heading>
                         <p>Inspired by the pro-democracy demonstrations held across the Middle East and North Africa from early 2011, in March a small group of online activists attempted to stage its own rally in Luanda to demand the resignation of the dos Santos regime. However, the authorities pre-emptively disbanded the march. The Government had earlier organized mass rallies in support of the MPLA. In September there were violent clashes in the capital between police and anti-regime protesters. Meanwhile, demonstrations in central Luanda were proscribed. Another small, youth-led demonstration was halted by the police in late September, and several journalists were reportedly attacked by unknown assailants. The MPLA repeatedly accused UNITA of orchestrating the protests, a charge denied by the opposition party. Sporadic anti-Government demonstrations continued during 2012–23, with arrests of demonstrators, journalists and online activists, and violence being reported.</p>
                         <p>Despite the unprecedented challenge to his authority, it was confirmed in June 2012 that President dos Santos would lead the MPLA in the legislative elections scheduled for August. Minister of State for Economic Co-ordination Manuel Vicente, who was widely regarded as a potential successor to the President, was named as the ruling party’s vice-presidential nominee.</p>
                         <p>Meanwhile, in January 2012 the MPLA-dominated legislature designated Suzana Inglês, a high-profile figure within the party, as President of the CNE. Opposition parties argued that her appointment would undermine the legitimacy of the upcoming polls and demanded that, in accordance with new electoral regulations, she be replaced by an independent candidate. Following opposition threats of large-scale protests and an electoral boycott, in May the Tribunal Supremo (Supreme Court) ruled that the appointment of Inglês had been unlawful; she was succeeded by André da Silva Neto in June.</p>
                         <p>At the legislative elections held on 31 August 2012, the MPLA won 71.9% of the valid votes cast and 175 seats in the National Assembly. As leader of the victorious party, dos Santos was awarded the presidency for a further five years. UNITA obtained 18.7% of the ballot and 32 seats, while the recently formed Convergência Ampla de Salvação de Angola-Coligação Eleitoral (CASA-CE) won eight seats, the PRS three and the FNLA two. Parties that had failed to attract 0.5% of the vote were to be formally disbanded. Turnout was recorded at 62.8%. UNITA, the CASA-CE and the PRS cited numerous allegations of electoral fraud, but their appeals were dismissed by the CNE and the Constitutional Court. Dos Santos and Vicente were inaugurated in late September. The President announced a largely unchanged Council of Ministers shortly afterwards. In June 2013 his son, José Filomeno de Sousa dos Santos, was appointed as head of the national sovereign wealth fund, prompting allegations of nepotism.</p>
                    </is-section>
                    <is-section sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                         <heading>Further Suppression of Anti-Government Dissent</heading>
                         <p>Details emerged in November 2013 implicating the security services in the suspected murder of two activists who had disappeared during the previous year. UNITA responded by organizing a large demonstration in Luanda; approximately 300 protesters were arrested amid violent clashes with the police. After a further demonstration there in May 2014, 20 detained protesters alleged that they had been beaten while in custody. In November Amnesty International accused the Angolan security forces of extrajudicial killings and the use of excessive force in suppressing anti-Government dissent.</p>
                         <p>UNITA claimed in April 2015 that the security forces had killed around 1,000 members of a religious sect deemed to be opposed to the Government during a raid in Huambo province. However, the authorities insisted that only 13 sect members had died after they had attacked and killed nine police officers. The leader of the sect, José Julino Kalupeteca, was given a 28-year gaol sentence in April 2016, having been found guilty of killing the nine police officers; nine other sect members also received lengthy prison terms.</p>
                         <p>In November 2015 trial proceedings began against 17 young activists who had been arrested in June and charged with plotting to overthrow both the Government and President dos Santos. They were imprisoned for between two and eight years in March 2016, but were placed under house arrest in June pending a Supreme Court appeal. It was announced in October that all 17 activists had been freed as the result of an amnesty; all charges against them were duly withdrawn.</p>
                    </is-section>
                    <is-section sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                         <heading>The 2017 Legislative Elections</heading>
                         <p>Dos Santos announced in November 2015 that Angola’s next legislative elections would take place in August 2017. In March 2016 the President confirmed his intention to retire from active politics in 2018, upon the expiry of his presidential mandate.</p>
                         <p>The prospect of a lasting peace in Cabinda diminished in February 2016, when FLEC announced the resumption of armed struggle against the Government. The FLEC leader, Tiago, died in exile in France in June; he was succeeded by his son, Emmanuel N’Zita, and a three-month ceasefire was announced by FLEC military leaders. However, violence increased significantly in August, with at least 50 Angolan soldiers reportedly killed in the army’s struggle against the insurgents by the second week of September.</p>
                         <p>In June 2016 dos Santos dismissed the board of directors of the state-owned oil corporation, Sociedade Nacional de Combustíveis de Angola (SONANGOL), and appointed his eldest daughter, Isabel, as CEO. Following a legal claim that her appointment contravened Angola’s patronage laws, in November Isabel dos Santos, a billionaire businesswoman, insisted that she had been chosen to lead SONANGOL as a result of her `professional competence’.</p>
                         <p>Despite having been re-elected as MPLA Chairman in August 2016, on 2 December Angola’s state radio station reported that President dos Santos would in fact leave office before the 2017 legislative elections. The MPLA nominated its recently elected Vice-President, Minister of National Defence João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, as its candidate in the forthcoming polls. Lourenço had succeeded Manuel Vicente (who was facing bribery allegations) in the vice-presidential role in August 2016.</p>
                         <p>In late April 2017 the legislative elections were called for 23 August. Although dos Santos (who was reportedly suffering from ill health) stood down as President in August after 38 years in power, he still held the MPLA leadership and was therefore expected to retain considerable influence over Angola’s political and security landscape. The election campaign was marred by violent clashes between supporters of the ruling MPLA and those of UNITA. Opposition protesters held demonstrations in Luanda and elsewhere in support of free and fair elections, leading to many arrests. Meanwhile, on 24 July Lourenço was dismissed as Minister of National Defence and Bornito de Sousa Baltazar Diogo as Minister of Territorial Administration, as a result of their participation in the forthcoming polls.</p>
                         <p>At the legislative elections the MPLA secured 61.1% of the valid votes cast and 150 of the 220 seats in the National Assembly, while UNITA obtained 26.7% and 51 seats. The CASA-CE won 9.5% of the ballot and 16 seats; the remaining seats were taken by the PRS (two) and the FNLA (one). Turnout was reported to be 76.1%. The Southern African Development Community observer mission declared that the election had taken place `in a free, honest and peaceful atmosphere’, while the CNE rejected numerous claims of electoral irregularities by Angola’s opposition parties—including UNITA. On 26 September 2017 Lourenço—as the candidate of the largest parliamentary party—was sworn in as President for a five-year term, with Diogo as his Vice-President. The opposition parties boycotted Lourenço’s inauguration ceremony. He appointed a new Council of Ministers on 28 September.</p>
                    </is-section>
                    <is-section sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                         <heading>President Lourenço’s First Term</heading>
                         <p>
            At his inauguration President Lourenço promised to introduce far-reaching reforms in order to rebuild Angola’s economy, tackle corruption and inequality, improve women’s rights, expand the private sector and increase press freedom. He took decisive measures to reduce the state’s dependency on allies and relatives of former President dos Santos, and to break up several of the large monopolies hitherto controlled by the dos Santos family. On 15 November 2017 Lourenço dismissed the board of SONANGOL, including Isabel dos Santos as CEO, naming as her successor Carlos Saturnino Guerra Sousa e Oliveira. (Saturnino had himself been removed from his executive role in Angola’s state oil company by Isabel dos Santos in 2016.) In December 2017 the new SONANGOL leadership launched an investigation into the `possible misappropriation’ of company funds by the former President’s daughter during her tenure as CEO; however, she strongly rejected any claims of wrongdoing. Meanwhile, as part of a review of the oil industry ordered by Lourenço in October 2017, a new Ministry of Mineral Resources and Petroleum was created, with Diamantino Pedro Azevedo at its head. By the end of November President Lourenço had replaced more than 60 senior officials employed under the dos Santos regime; the changes affected, 
            <i>inter alia</i>
            , the country’s diamond, utilities, transport, banking
            <!--LPD 23.1.18: Including a new central bank governor, executive director and CEO of the Capital Markets Commission, and Attorney-General. I wasnt sure whether we should list all of these, and name them, owing to space constraints.-->
            , judicial and media sectors. In late November a new chief of police and head of the intelligence service were also announced.
          </p>
                         <p>In January 2018 José Filomeno de Sousa dos Santos was removed as head of the national sovereign wealth fund and replaced by a former Minister of Finance, Carlos Alberto Lopes. In September José dos Santos was detained and charged with the embezzlement of state funds totalling some US&#160;$1,500m., as well as money laundering and fraud. The Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces was also dismissed in April 2018, along with the head of the External Intelligence Service and a number of other senior military figures. In June Augusto da Silva Tomás was replaced as the Minister of Transport; he was arrested in September amid corruption allegations.</p>
                         <p>Azevedo announced in August 2018 that a national oil and gas agency was to be established, while SONANGOL was to be restructured. He hoped that the new agency would allow Angola to boost its petroleum reserves and increase oil production. The National Petroleum, Gas and Biofuel Agency (ANGP) was formally established on 6 February 2019, to assume responsibility for granting and administering the country’s hydrocarbons concessions from SONANGOL. ANGP would act as a regulatory body for the industry and help to attract investment. In May Lourenço again dismissed the board of SONANGOL, appointing Sebastião Pai Querido Gaspar Martins as CEO. The President took this action amid widespread fuel shortages, which SONANGOL officials blamed on their inability to import fuel due to Angola’s insufficient foreign currency reserves.</p>
                         <p>President Lourenço officially replaced dos Santos as MPLA Chairman at a congress of the ruling party held in early September 2018. Lourenço had stood unopposed in an election for the party leadership and secured 98.6% of the votes cast. His election to the MPLA chairmanship signalled the formal end of the dos Santos era. On 26 September, the first anniversary of his coming to power, President Lourenço gave a speech at the UN General Assembly in New York, USA, hailing the beginning of a `new Angola’.</p>
                         <p>In December 2018 President Lourenço convened discussions with various representatives of Angola’s civil society groups, in an effort to foster a new national dialogue between the Government and opposition. Amid a number of positive developments concerning human rights and political freedoms, observers also noted that by the end of 2018 the judiciary appeared to be operating with less state interference. A new penal code was approved by the National Assembly on 23 January 2019. This revised code entered effect on 10 February 2021, thereby decriminalizing homosexuality in Angola and banning discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.</p>
                         <p>Meanwhile, Lourenço effected a number of ministerial changes in January 2019, also appointing new governors of Luanda, Kwanza-Norte and Kwanza-Sul provinces. At a special congress of the MPLA held on 15 June, institutional changes were made to extend the powers of Lourenço and his allies. On 24 July Lourenço announced a further government reorganization, including the appointment of Eugénio César Laborinho as Minister of the Interior and Manuel Neto da Costa as Minister of the Economy and Planning. New governors were also chosen in Cabinda and Kuando Kubango provinces.</p>
                         <p>The decision by President Lourenço in late May 2019 to allow the body of former UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi—17 years after his death—to be returned to his family for a reburial in his hometown, Lopitanga, was described by one of Savimbi’s sons, Aleluiah, as `a strong, symbolic gesture for national reconciliation’.</p>
                         <p>On 15 August 2019 Tomás became the first senior official from the dos Santos regime to be imprisoned on corruption charges since the start of Lourenço’s presidency. The former Minister of Transport was found guilty of a number of offences, including the abuse of power, embezzlement of state funds, and money laundering.</p>
                         <p>
            Lourenço implemented further government changes in October 2019, with Vera Esperanca dos Santos Daves appointed as Angola’s first female Minister of Finance on 8 October. Daves’ predecessor, Augusto Archer de Sousa Mangueira, was chosen as governor of Namibe province. On 21 January 2020, amid Angola’s ongoing economic crisis (see 
            <i>Economic Affairs</i>
            ), da Costa was also replaced as Minister of the Economy and Planning by Sérgio de Sousa Mendes dos Santos. On the same day a new governor of Cunene province was named.
          </p>
                         <p>
            The acquisition of wealth by Isabel dos Santos during her father’s presidency became the subject of intense scrutiny from late 2019, in particular her business dealings as CEO of SONANGOL. On 31 December Isabel dos Santos’ assets were temporarily frozen by a court in Luanda, in response to claims by the Government that it was owed some US&#160;$1,000m. by dos Santos and her associates. The Attorney-General subsequently confirmed that Isabel dos Santos was being formally investigated regarding allegations of money laundering and the embezzlement of public funds; thousands of documents that appeared to implicate her in corrupt business deals were leaked to the media. 
            <!--LPD 28.1.20: Would we go into more specific details about the nature of the allegations if/when a trial actually takes place?-->
            It was announced in late January 2020 that the former President’s daughter would be the subject of an international arrest warrant if she refused the authorities’ request to return to Angola from exile in the United Kingdom. However, Isabel dos Santos strongly denied all the allegations, claiming that Lourenço’s administration was using them to divert public attention from the country’s dire economic situation. Nevertheless, in late July 2021 the International Court of Arbitration in Paris, France, ordered dos Santos to return $500m. in shares that she had allegedly acquired illegally from SONANGOL
            <!--LPD 24.1.22: This is quite complicated, and also involves the Portuguese energy company Galp, so you may wish to expand on this if space permits.-->
            . On 9 December the US authorities barred Isabel dos Santos from entering the country, citing her involvement in `significant corruption’. On 27 December 2022 the `preventive’ seizure of her assets was ordered by the Supreme Court in Luanda, which cited further evidence of money laundering and embezzlement.
          </p>
                         <p>Meanwhile, the trial of her brother, José dos Santos, on corruption charges began at the Supreme Court on 9 December 2019. His three co-defendants included a former governor of the central bank, Valter Filipe da Silva. On 14 August 2020 all four defendants were convicted of fraud and embezzlement, and given terms of imprisonment. José dos Santos received a five-year sentence, after he was found to have embezzled US&#160;$500m. while head of the national sovereign wealth fund; an appeal against his sentence was rejected by the Supreme Court in November 2021.</p>
                         <p>On 27 March 2020 a national state of emergency was introduced in Angola in an effort to contain the spread of COVID-19. Angola’s land borders were closed in late March and international travel was banned. The state of emergency was downgraded, on 26 May, to a state of calamity, which was formally ended on 16 May 2022. International flights were allowed to resume from 21 September 2020, although entry into Angola remained restricted due to the risk posed by newly emerging variants of COVID-19. Since the start of the global pandemic, the Government had introduced several economic and social measures to alleviate the impact of the disease on the population.</p>
                         <p>
            In April 2020 President Lourenço announced a new, reduced Council of Ministers. Téte António was named as Minister of External Relations and João Ernesto dos Santos as Minister of National Defence and War Veterans. New governors of Luanda and Huambo provinces were appointed on 26 May, although the former was herself replaced on 30 June 2021. In late October 2020 a new governor was also named in Uíge province, followed in early March 2021 by governors serving Benguela and Huíla provinces. On 31 May Lourenço dismissed Pedro Sebastião as Minister of State and Head of Security in the Presidency, in connection with a financial scandal involving army officers under his authority. Sebastião was replaced by Francisco Pereira Furtado. The Minister of the Economy and Planning, Sérgio dos Santos
            <!--LPD 24.1.22: Articles more commonly call him just Sergio Santos, but I thought this would be inconsistent with other dos Santos above?-->
            , was also removed from his post on 1 September and succeeded by Mário Augusto Caetano João. Meanwhile, as part of a package of constitutional reforms, on 22 June 2021 the National Assembly voted to grant independence to the central bank and to expand its role.
          </p>
                    </is-section>
                    <is-section id="AO.DIR.16735291321" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                         <heading>The 2022 Legislative Elections</heading>
                         <p>
            In advance of the 
            
            legislative elections scheduled for August 2022, and amid a series of anti-Government protests staged partly in response to new electoral laws, political commentators suggested that the MPLA was striving to present a more united front. One sign of this apparent reconciliation between the party’s competing factions was the return, on 14 September 2021, of former President dos Santos to Luanda from Barcelona, Spain, where he had spent the previous 30 months.
            <!--LPD 24.1.22: There is much more that could be said about the elections, disputes re election laws etc (see https://globalvoices.org/2021/09/15/constitutional-changes-and-mistrust-mark-angolas-election-announcement/), but in view of space constraints I wonder if this detail is more appropriate for the ASS history or the next EWYB?-->
                         </p>
                         <p>During 25–27 November 2021 the first Angola International Diamond Conference (AIDC) was held in Saurimo, the capital of Lunda-Sul province. Officials hailed the AIDC as demonstrating Angola’s growing importance in the global diamond trade and its improving business environment, as well as stimulating the social and economic development of Lunda-Sul.</p>
                         <p>At the legislative elections held on 24 August 2022 the MPLA secured the highest representation, with 51.2% of the valid votes cast and 124 seats, while UNITA came second, with 44.0% of the ballot and 90 seats. The remaining seats were won by the PRS, the FNLA and the Partido Humanista de Angola (established in 2020 as a breakaway party from UNITA), which each received two seats. The CASA-CE received only 0.8% of the vote and no seats. Lourenço was thus re-elected as President. However, the result demonstrated a significant shift in popularity from the MPLA to UNITA since the 2017 polls, particularly in Luanda. Voter turnout was also extremely low, at only around 45%. UNITA challenged the validity of the result, but on 5 September 2022 Angola’s Constitutional Court rejected an appeal by the party for it to be annulled due to `irregularities’. International monitors, while acknowledging some deficiencies, also generally endorsed the result of the ballot.</p>
                         <p>
            On 15 September 2022 President Lourenço was sworn in for his second term and he installed a new (but largely unchanged) Council of Ministers. The following day Carolina Cerqueira was elected as the new President of the National Assembly, becoming the first woman to hold the post.
            <!--LPD 29.12.22: It was surprisingly hard to check precise dates for her election and the formal installation of the cabinet; however, the parliament website confirms that Cerqueira was elected on 16 September (the day after Lourenco was inaugurated).-->
                         </p>
                    </is-section>
                    <is-section sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                         <heading>Recent Developments: Renewed Anti-Government Protests</heading>
                         <p>Anti-Government demonstrations had continued during 2022. Many protesters—frustrated by the high levels of unemployment and poverty and opposed to another five years of MPLA rule—were detained by the security forces. These rallies intensified during the election campaign and particularly following the MPLA’s victory in the August polls. On 24 September thousands of UNITA and other opposition supporters held a large demonstration in Luanda, accusing the Lourenço administration of having committed electoral fraud and demanding an end to MPLA rule.</p>
                         <p>
            Meanwhile, on 8 July 2022 former President José Eduardo dos Santos died in Spain, where he was undergoing medical treatment. Dos Santos’ family requested that an autopsy be carried out to rule out any `suspicious circumstances’ surrounding his death. However, on 17 August his death was confirmed by Spanish officials to be from natural causes; the former leader’s body was therefore returned to Angola for a state funeral which was held in Luanda on 28 August.
            <!--LPD 13.1.23: Not sure how much detail you would like here. Much more could be said about the family claims, particularly from daughter Tchize, and its wish for dos Santos to be buried in Spain and so on (claiming that Lourenco would use the state funeral for political/election purposes). However, I was concerned about extent, and perhaps ASS will cover this more extensively?-->
                         </p>
                         <p>
            President Lourenço dismissed Minister of State for Economic Co-ordination Manuel José Nunes Júnior on 6 June 2023; he was replaced three days later by José de Lima Massano, hitherto Governor of the central bank. The dismissal followed renewed protests against the Government—specifically its recent removal of fuel subsidies, which had triggered further price increases. The protests were again met with a strong response by security forces: at least five people were reportedly shot dead in Huambo province. Following his appointment, Massano announced a review of the fuel subsidy reforms. Manuel António Tiago Dias was appointed as central bank Governor on 16 June. On 12 July Victor Francisco dos Santos Fernandes was also removed as Minister of Industry and Commerce; his portfolio was reassigned to Rui Miguêns de Oliveira.
            <!--LPD 9.11.23: The ASS calendar gives 13 July, but this (https://www.jornaldeangola.ao/ao/noticias/rui-miguens-de-oliveira-e-novo-ministro-da-industria-e-comercio/) seems to show that de Oliveira was appointed on 12 July.-->
                         </p>
                         <p>
            On 14 October 2023 Lourenço survived a motion brought to the National Assembly by UNITA’s 90 deputies, who proposed the creation of a parliamentary commission to examine whether there were grounds to impeach the President. The motion was defeated by 123 of the MPLA’s deputies, with one abstention.
            <!--LPD 10.11.23: You may wish to add more detail, but UNITA cited a number of grounds, including alleged violations of the Constitution, the harsh response to recent protests, etc, and it might depend on how much space we have/if there are new events to add.-->
                         </p>
                    </is-section>
               </is-section>
               <is-section sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                    <heading>Refugees</heading>
                    <p id="AO.IS.59">
          Between late 2002 and late 2003 the Angolan Government and the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) established separate tripartite commissions with Zambia, the DRC, Congo, Namibia, Botswana and South Africa, to facilitate the repat­riation of Angolan refugees from these countries. In mid-2012 there were approximately 120,000 Angolan refugees in the region, compared with some 470,000 in early 2003. UNHCR resumed its Angolan refugee repatriation scheme in November 2011, while continuing to seek co-operation from host countries in finding alternative solutions for refugees, including naturalization or local integration with permanent residency. In June 2012 UNHCR declared that Angolan exiles who had fled from the various conflicts since 1965 would no longer be considered refugees, owing to Angola’s relative political stability and the possibility of repatriation. Efforts were ongoing in 2023 to normalize the status of the remaining former Angolan refugees or to encourage their return to Angola. At mid-2016 these numbered approximately 60,000: some 20,000 Angolans resided in the DRC, 20,000 in Zambia, and a further 20,000 in Namibia and South Africa. The numbers subsequently declined further, although by very different rates: for example, at 30 September 2023 UNHCR estimated that there were 13,359 former Angolan refugees in Zambia and just 373 in the DRC. 
          <!--LPD 7.11.2023: Taken from https://data.unhcr.org/en/country/zmb and https://data.unhcr.org/en/country/cod.-->
          About 2,000 Angolan refugees in South Africa reportedly risked deportation once their temporary residency permits (issued in 2018) expired at the end of 2021. Meanwhile, an upsurge in violence between government forces and insurgents in the Kasaï Central region of the DRC from April 2017, with a further escalation in early 2018, resulted in a large number of Congolese refugees fleeing to Angola. By 31 December 2018 a reported 37,089 Congolese refugees had been formally registered by UNHCR in Angola’s Lunda-Norte province. Although from mid-August 2019 thousands of refugees began returning to the Kasaï Central region, amid reports of increased security in the DRC following the presidential election held in December 2018, after renewed fighting between various groups in the DRC from August 2020, UNHCR estimated that the number of Congolese refugees in Angola totalled 22,969 at 31 October 2023.
          <!--LPD 7.11.23: See https://data.unhcr.org/en/country/ago.-->
                    </p>
               </is-section>
               <is-section sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                    <heading>Foreign Affairs</heading>
                    <is-section sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                         <heading>Regional Relations</heading>
                         <p id="AO.IS.60">
            After the internal uprising in August 1998 against the regime of Laurent-Désiré Kabila in the DRC, the Angolan Government provided Kabila with military support. In October, as the conflict escalated in eastern DRC, Angola, in alliance with Namibia and Zimbabwe, pledged to continue supporting Kabila until the rebels were defeated. Following the assassination of Kabila in January 2001, the Angolan Government sent several thousand additional troops to the DRC. However, by the end of October 2002 Angola, Namibia and Zimbabwe had withdrawn all their troops. During 2008–09 the Angolan and Congolese authorities engaged in mutual expulsions of refugees from their respective territories. In 2009 an estimated 160,000 Congolese were expelled from Angola, while at least 30,000 Angolans were forcibly removed from the DRC. Although the two countries agreed in October 2009 to cease these activities, during 2010–18 Angola continued to expel large numbers of DRC nationals, many of whom were reportedly beaten, tortured or sexually assaulted. It was widely believed that the forced repatriations—which often affected illegal diamond miners from the DRC—reflected bilateral tensions over the control of natural resources along their disputed border. (The Angolan Government denied reports of the widespread mistreatment of DRC refugees, and claimed that the repatriations were in fact voluntary or that the DRC nationals were `irregular migrants’.) In August 2019, after many Congolese refugees had started to return to the DRC (see 
            <i>Refugees</i>
            ), UNHCR signed a tripartite agreement with the Angolan and Congolese Governments concerning voluntary repatriation.
          </p>
                         <p>
            Meanwhile, recurrent Angolan incursions into the DRC (and Congo), ostensibly to monitor FLEC rebels, were also a source of discord. Amid the Congolese refugee crisis of 2017 (see 
            <i>Refugees</i>
            ), in April the Angolan Government sent military reinforcements to its border with the DRC, with the stated aim of preventing armed Congolese militants from entering its territory.
          </p>
                         <p>In March 2014 Angola and Congo concluded a border agreement covering the disputed boundary between Cabinda (Angola) and Niari (Congo). A military confrontation there in October 2013, which had resulted in Angolan troops temporarily taking around 50 soldiers from Congo hostage, appeared to have convinced both sides that a lasting diplomatic solution was necessary.</p>
                         <p>In March 2011 Angola dispatched some 200 military personnel to Guinea-Bissau as part of the Angolan Armed Forces Security Mission in Guinea-Bissau (MISSANG). The Angolan advisers were deployed to support the Guinea-Bissau authorities in their efforts to restructure the West African country’s military, which was alleged to be heavily involved in the illegal drugs trade. MISSANG was viewed with deep suspicion by senior Guinea-Bissau officers since the reforms would reduce their power and privileges. Tensions escalated sharply in December when elements within the Guinea-Bissau military staged an abortive coup against the pro-Angolan Government of Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Júnior, who was forced to take temporary shelter in the Angolan embassy. On 9 April 2012 Gomes Júnior blocked an attempt by Guinea-Bissau’s military leadership unilaterally to terminate MISSANG’s mandate. Although the Angolan Government agreed to the replacement of MISSANG by a multinational mission, on 12 April the Guinea-Bissau military deposed Gomes Júnior and interim President Raimundo Pereira. The military junta that assumed power claimed that the coup had been necessary to prevent Angola from dismantling Guinea-Bissau’s armed forces. A settlement on the restoration of constitutional order was subsequently concluded following mediation by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which established a new mission to replace MISSANG. Angola’s influence in Guinea-Bissau was thus curtailed, and all MISSANG troops were withdrawn by June.</p>
                    </is-section>
                    <is-section id="AO.IS.16993609101" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
                         <heading>Other External Relations</heading>
                         <p id="AO.IS.62">
            In 2000 a French judicial inquiry was instigated into the alleged trafficking of arms to Angola by a French company, Brenco International, and a French businessman, Pierre Falcone. The company, along with a number of prominent French politicians, was alleged to have engaged in money laundering and the unauthorized sales of arms worth some US&#160;$600m. to the dos Santos Government in 1993–94. Falcone was placed under provisional detention in France in December 2000, but was released one year later. In April 2007 it was reported that 42 people, including Falcone and the Russian-Israeli businessman Arkadi Gaydamak (who was to be tried 
            <i>in absentia</i>
            ), would face charges ranging from arms trafficking to tax evasion. Other notable defendants in the trial, which began in Paris in October 2008, were former French Minister of the Interior Charles Pasqua, and Jean-Christophe Mitterrand, son of former French President François Mitterrand. Of the 42 charged, none were Angolan nationals, although prosecutors claimed that many officials in that country, including dos Santos, had received tens of millions of dollars in illegal payments. In October 2009 Gaydamak and Falcone were each sentenced to six years’ imprisonment. Pasqua was jailed for three years (two suspended) and fined €100,000, while Jean-Christophe Mitterrand was given a two-year suspended sentence and fined €375,000. Following an appeal, in April 2011 a French court acquitted Pasqua and reduced the prison sentences imposed upon Falcone and Gaydamak to two-and-a-half years and three years, respectively.
          </p>
                         <p>Relations with France have been strengthened by visits to Paris by President Lourenço in May 2018—his first to Europe after assuming office—and May 2021 for a summit on African economies hosted by the French Government and the African Union (AU). French President Emmanuel Macron travelled to Angola in March 2023, informing Lourenço that France sought to construct `a balanced and reciprocal partnership’. The agricultural sector was a focal point of the visit, with a €200m. aid package being agreed to assist Angola in tackling climate change and water insecurity, and boost agricultural production.</p>
                         <p>The Governments of Angola and the People’s Republic of China signed a Framework Agreement on Co-operation in 2008. In 2010 they pledged, as strategic partners, to improve dialogue, realign their institutional mechanisms, and increase trade and economic co-operation. Bilateral ties have been progressively strengthened since Xi Jinping became China’s President in March 2013. In June 2015, following discussions between President dos Santos and President Xi in the Chinese capital, Beijing, eight agreements were concluded pledging co-operation in finance, transport and utilities. In January 2018 the Chinese Government agreed to assist Angola with its objective of economic diversification. President Lourenço visited Beijing in October, confirming that a loan of US&#160;$2,000m. had been secured from the China Development Bank to assist Angola with future infrastructure projects. China also provided medical assistance to Angola as it tackled the COVID-19 outbreak in 2020, and during 2021 donated several batches of the Chinese-made Sinopharm vaccine to the country. A new international airport in Luanda was inaugurated in November 2023; China had invested $1,200m. of the total $2,500m. cost of the project.</p>
                    </is-section>
               </is-section>
          </is-section>
          <is-section id="AO.IS.64" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
               <heading>Constitution and Government</heading>
               <p id="AO.IS.65">According to the Constitution promulgated on 5 February 2010, legislative power is vested in the Assembleia Nacional (National Assembly), with 220 members elected for five years on the basis of proportional representation. Executive power is held by the President, who serves a term of five years (renewable for a maximum of two terms). The leader of the political party, or coalition of political parties, obtaining the majority of votes in legislative elections shall be named President of the Republic and shall be assisted by a Vice-President; the position of Vice-President shall be filled by the deputy leader of the ruling party. As Head of State and Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces, the President governs with the assistance of an appointed Council of Ministers.</p>
               <p id="AO.IS.66">For the purposes of local government, the country is divided into 18 provinces, each administered by an appointed Governor.</p>
          </is-section>
          <is-section id="AO.IS.12639184101" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
               <heading>Regional and International Co-operation</heading>
               <p id="AO.IS.81.1">
        Angola is a member of the 
        <xr pageref="Y" ref="AU.IO">African Union (AU)</xr>
        , of the 
        <xr pageref="Y" ref="ADB.IO">African Development Bank (AfDB)</xr>
        , of the 
        <xr pageref="Y" ref="COMESA.IO">Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA)</xr>
        , of the 
        <xr pageref="Y" ref="SADC.IO">Southern African Development Community (SADC)</xr>
        , and of the 
        <xr pageref="Y" ref="WB0231XD.IO.TXT.18">Gulf of Guinea Commission (Commission du Golfe de Guinée—CGG)</xr>
        . The CGG’s headquarters were established in Luanda in 2006.
      </p>
               <p>
        Angola became a member of the UN in 1976, and was admitted to the 
        <xr pageref="Y" ref="WTO.IO">World Trade Organization (WTO)</xr>
         in 1996. In 2007 Angola joined the 
        <xr pageref="Y" ref="OPEC.IO">Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)</xr>
        ; however, in late 2023 Angola announced its withdrawal from OPEC. Angola is also a member of the 
        <xr pageref="Y" ref="WB0231XD.IO.TXT.13">Comunidade dos Países de Língua Portuguesa</xr>
        , a Portuguese-speaking commonwealth.
      </p>
          </is-section>
          <is-section id="AO.IS.71" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
               <heading>Economic Affairs</heading>
               <p id="AO.IS.72">In 2022, according to estimates by the World Bank, Angola’s gross national income (GNI), measured at average 2020–22 prices, was US&#160;$67,763m., equivalent to $1,900 per head (or $6,450 per head on an international purchasing-power parity basis). During 2013–22, it was estimated, Angola’s population grew at an average annual rate of 3.5%, while gross domestic product (GDP) per head decreased, in real terms, by an average of 3.4% per year. Overall GDP decreased, in real terms, at an average annual rate of 0.1% in 2013–22; GDP increased by 1.2% in 2021 and by 3.0% in 2022.</p>
               <p id="AO.IS.73">According to official figures, agriculture contributed 13.7% of GDP in 2022. Some 52.0% of the employed labour force were engaged in the agricultural sector in that year. Coffee is the principal cash crop. The main subsistence crops are cassava, bananas, maize, sweet potatoes, sugar cane and potatoes. The widespread presence of unexploded anti-personnel mines continues to hinder the redevelopment of the agricultural sector. During 2013–22, according to the World Bank, agricultural GDP increased at an average annual rate of 5.5%; agricultural GDP increased by 17.2% in 2021 and by 3.9% in 2022.</p>
               <p id="AO.IS.74">Industry (including mining, manufacturing, construction and power) provided 45.1% of GDP in 2022 and engaged 7.1% of the employed labour force in the same year, according to official figures. The economic recovery in the country, as well as increased petroleum production and earnings, and Chinese sponsorship, led to strong expansion in the construction sector in the late 2000s, with investment in the redevelopment of infrastructure. According to the World Bank, industrial GDP decreased, in real terms, at an average annual rate of 2.8% in 2013–22; industrial GDP decreased by 8.3% in 2021, but increased by 1.8% in 2022.</p>
               <p id="AO.IS.75">Mining along with utilities contributed 31.6% of GDP in 2022, according to official figures. Angola’s principal mineral exports are petroleum and diamonds. In addition, there are reserves of iron ore, copper, lead, zinc, gold, manganese, phosphates, salt and uranium. At the end of 2020 Angola had estimated petroleum reserves of 7,783m. barrels, sufficient to sustain production at current levels for nearly 16 years. Until January 2024 Angola was a member of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), and was subject to production quotas agreed by the Organization’s Conference. However, the Angolan Government announced its withdrawal from OPEC after disagreeing with its proposed new production quota. According to UN estimates, the combined GDP of mining and utilities decreased at an average annual rate of 4.6% during 2013–22; sectoral GDP declined by 12.8% in 2021, but expanded by 0.2% in 2022.</p>
               <p id="AO.IS.76">The manufacturing sector provided 7.4% of GDP in 2022 and engaged 3.8% of the employed labour force in the same year, according to official figures. The principal branch of manufacturing is petroleum refining. Other manufacturing activities include food processing, brewing, textiles and construction materials. According to the World Bank, the GDP of the manufacturing sector increased at an average annual rate of 1.6% in 2013–22; manufacturing GDP increased by 2.5% in 2022.</p>
               <p>
        According to official figures, construction provided 6.1% of GDP in 2022 and engaged 3.3% of the employed labour force in the same year. The GDP of the construction sector decreased at an average annual rate of 2.4% during 2013–22; construction GDP declined by 6.7% in 2021, but grew by 5.5%&#160;in 2022, according to UN estimates.
        <!--Have used fig from AfDB report for this as no WB constant price data from which to calculate it is available for construction sector.-->
               </p>
               <p id="AO.IS.77">Energy is derived mainly from hydroelectric power, which, according to the World Bank, provided 53.2% of Angola’s electricity production in 2015, while petroleum accounted for 46.8%. Angola’s power potential exceeds its requirements; however, power supply is erratic.</p>
               <p id="AO.IS.78">
        According to official figures, services accounted for 41.1% of GDP in 2022 and engaged 41.0% of the employed labour force in the same year. In real terms, the GDP of the services sector increased at an average annual rate of 1.2% in 2013–22, according to the World Bank; services GDP increased by 4.2% in 2022.
        <!--LPD 9.11.23: Other sectors give the last two years available.-->
               </p>
               <p id="AO.IS.79">In 2022 Angola recorded an estimated visible merchandise trade surplus of US&#160;$32,770.7m., and there was a surplus of $11,762.9m. on the current account of the balance of payments. In 2022 the principal source of imports was the People’s Republic of China (16.0%); other major suppliers were Portugal, the Republic of Korea (South Korea), the Netherlands and India. China was the principal market for exports in that year (contributing 43.7% of total exports); India, France and the Netherlands were also significant purchasers of Angola’s exports. The principal imports in 2022 were mineral products, machinery and mechanical appliances and electrical equipment and parts, chemicals and related products, vehicles, aircraft, vessels and associated transport equipment, iron and steel, other base metals and articles thereof, and vegetables and vegetable products. The principal exports in that year were mineral products (accounting for an estimated 95.1% of total export earnings).</p>
               <p id="AO.IS.80">In 2022, according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Angola recorded a preliminary balanced budget. Angola’s general government gross debt was 37,844,202m. kwanza in 2022, equivalent to 66.7% of GDP. Angola’s total external debt at the end of 2021 was US&#160;$67,277m., of which $46,740m. was public and publicly guaranteed debt. In that year the cost of servicing long-term public and publicly guaranteed debt and repayments to the IMF was equivalent to 33.3% of the value of exports of goods, services and income (excluding workers’ remittances). According to the IMF, the average annual rate of inflation was 20.0% in 2013–21. Consumer prices increased by an average of 21.4% in 2022, according to official figures. In 2022 the unemployment rate was 30.2% of the labour force.</p>
               <p id="AO.IS.82">
        After the civil war ended in 2002, Angola experienced dramatic economic growth, led largely by the petroleum sector. (In 2022, according to the Energy Institute, output of crude petroleum stood at almost 1.2m. barrels per day, and Angola was the third largest oil producer in Africa, after Algeria and Nigeria.) However, the global financial crisis and decrease in international oil prices precipitated a sharp deceleration in GDP growth in 2009, leaving Angola unable to service its debts. In November the Government agreed to implement a fiscal reform programme in return for an IMF loan. Amid the additional rise in oil prices and improving global economy, Angola achieved growth of 6.8% in 2013. Yet the price of oil declined precipitously in late 2014; economic growth decelerated to 3.0% in 2015, and, according to the IMF, GDP declined by 2.6% in 2016. Although oil prices rose from mid-2016, GDP again contracted, by 0.1%, in 2017. In late 2017 President João Lourenço announced reforms to diversify the economy from its reliance on hydrocarbons, bring macroeconomic stability and encourage foreign investment; following the National Development Plan for 2018–22, a new plan for 2023–27 was approved in September 2023. In October 2019 the central bank changed Angola’s exchange rate to a fully floating regime, leading to a depreciation of the kwanza against the US dollar. Amid declining oil production and negative economic growth, in December 2018 the IMF agreed a three-year extended arrangement for US&#160;$3,700m. to support the Government’s reforms (this increased to $4,500m. in September 2020, owing to COVID-19). GDP contracted by 2.1% in 2018 and 0.6% in 2019, amid a further fall in oil output. A privatization programme launched in August 2019 targeted the divestment of 178 public companies during 2019–22 (later extended to 2023–26); 96 companies had been privatized by early 2023, with SONANGOL to be partially privatized by 2026. In 2020 the collapse in oil prices due to COVID-19 resulted in an ongoing recession. GDP contracted for the fifth successive year, by 5.5% and, according to the African Development Bank (AfDB), public debt reached 135% of GDP. However, amid a sharp recovery in oil prices, there was a return to growth, of 1.2% in 2021 and 3.0% in 2022. The debt-to-GDP ratio fell to 56.1% in 2022, according to the AfDB, which commended Angola for its `remarkable economic and fiscal reforms’. Nevertheless, significant problems remained, including high unemployment (recorded at 29.6% in the fourth quarter of 2022) and poverty (32.8% in 2023). The IMF forecast GDP growth of 0.9% for 2023, owing to reduced oil production.
        <!--LPD 8.11.23: Angola was the third largest oil producer in 2022, according to the EI. Most other sources give these three countries in the top 3 or 4 (with Libya), but they differ in terms of position. The ASS economy still names Angola in first place, so my change could be slightly problematic. The poverty figure was taken from the World Bank Overview, but I have seen it in other articles, so not sure if we need to name the source. (We also dont cite INE for the unemployment figure - it is updated from the home page.)-->
               </p>
          </is-section>
          <is-section id="AO.IS.85" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="IS-SECTREF">
               <heading>Public Holidays</heading>
               <public-holidays>
                    <!--Carnival Day is Shrove Tuesday-->
                    <holiday-year>
                         <year>2025</year>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>1 January</date>
                              <holiday-name>New Year’s Day</holiday-name>
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>4 January</date>
                              <holiday-name>Martyrs’ Day</holiday-name>
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>4 February</date>
                              <holiday-name>Anniversary of the outbreak of the armed struggle against Portuguese colonialism</holiday-name>
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>4 March</date>
                              <holiday-name>Carnival Day</holiday-name>
                              <!--Shrove Tuesday is Carnival Day-->
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>8 March</date>
                              <holiday-name>International Women’s Day</holiday-name>
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>27 March</date>
                              <holiday-name>Victory Day</holiday-name>
                              <endnoteref idref="AO.IS.100" ref-symbol="*" />
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>4 April</date>
                              <holiday-name>Peace and National Reconciliation Day</holiday-name>
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>14 April</date>
                              <holiday-name>Youth Day</holiday-name>
                              <endnoteref idref="AO.IS.100" ref-symbol="*" />
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>18 April</date>
                              <holiday-name>Good Friday</holiday-name>
                              <endnoteref idref="AO.IS.100" ref-symbol="*" />
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>1 May</date>
                              <holiday-name>Workers’ Day</holiday-name>
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>25 May</date>
                              <holiday-name>Africa Day</holiday-name>
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>1 June</date>
                              <holiday-name>International Children’s Day</holiday-name>
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>1 August</date>
                              <holiday-name>Armed Forces’ Day</holiday-name>
                              <endnoteref idref="AO.IS.100" ref-symbol="*" />
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>17 September</date>
                              <holiday-name>National Hero’s Day, birthday of Dr Agostinho Neto</holiday-name>
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>2 November</date>
                              <holiday-name>All Souls’ Day</holiday-name>
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>11 No­vember</date>
                              <holiday-name>Independence Day</holiday-name>
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>1 December</date>
                              <holiday-name>Pioneers’ Day</holiday-name>
                              <endnoteref idref="AO.IS.100" ref-symbol="*" />
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>10 December</date>
                              <holiday-name>Foundation of the MPLA Day</holiday-name>
                              <endnoteref idref="AO.IS.100" ref-symbol="*" />
                         </holiday>
                         <holiday>
                              <date>25 December</date>
                              <holiday-name>Christmas Day and Family Day</holiday-name>
                         </holiday>
                    </holiday-year>
                    <endnote id="AO.IS.100" ref-symbol="*">Although not officially recognized as public holidays, these days are popularly treated as such.</endnote>
               </public-holidays>
          </is-section>
     </is-section>
</intro-survey>