<?xml version="1.0"?>
<region-overview id="ASS.RO.1096889432" iso="ass" media="ONLINE" usage="ass" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
     <p>The main political and economic developments in each of the 53 countries and territories of the region, are comprehensively narrated and examined in the fully revised online edition of Africa South of the Sahara (the 53rd in print). Readers’ perspectives are further expanded by the General Survey, a collection of introductory essays providing in-depth analysis of current economic trends, an assessment of aid and development initiatives over the past 100 years, a discussion of France’s ongoing involvement in Africa, and an investigation of the upholding, and, in some cases, breakdown, of the rule of law in sub-Saharan Africa.</p>
     <p>
    In addition to contributions by specialist authors, researchers and commentators, all statistical and directory material in the new edition has been extensively updated, revised and expanded. A calendar of the key political events of 2022–2
    
    3 provides convenient rapid reference to the year’s main developments. Comprehensive coverage of international organizations and research bodies active in Africa, is included, together with detailed background information on the continent’s major agricultural and mineral commodities. Select bibliographies of relevant books and periodicals are also provided.
  </p>
     <p>The period under review has been marked by ongoing political and economic turbulence. Members of the Presidential Guard ousted and detained President Mohamed Bazoum in Niger in July 2023, citing concerns over security, the economy and corruption. The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) demanded his reinstatement, threatening the use of force to restore constitutional order. However, fears of the potential for a wider regional conflict were stoked when the juntas in Burkina Faso and Mali announced that they would support the new authorities in Niger in the event of military intervention by ECOWAS; Guinea also opposed the ECOWAS sanctions on Niger. In mid-September Niger, Burkina Faso and Mali signed a mutual defence pact, the Liptako-Gourma Charter, creating an Alliance of Sahel States (Alliance des États du Sahel). Later in September France, which had withdrawn its troops from Mali in 2022, pledging to continue anti-jihadist operations in the wider Sahel and to increase its co-operation with Niger, decided to withdraw its forces and its ambassador from that country. Meanwhile, at the end of August 2023 longstanding President Ali Bongo Ondimba was removed in a military coup in Gabon, just hours after the announcement of the results of a presidential election that had appeared to have returned him to office. Gabon, in contrast to the states of the Sahel subregion, had been considered relatively stable and the coup raised fears of increased insecurity elsewhere. At the end of August ECOWAS Chairman Bola Ahmed Adekunle Tinubu, who had been inaugurated as Nigerian President in late May following elections in February, condemned `autocratic contagion’ in sub-Saharan Africa and pledged to work with other African leaders to safeguard democracy.</p>
     <p>There was also increasing concern at the rise in the number of African citizens experiencing food insecurity in 2022–23, and in many cases the issue was compounded by ongoing conflict, in particular in the countries of the Horn of Africa and the Sahel. United Nations agencies estimated in late 2023 that some 150m. people in the sub-Saharan region were facing acute food insecurity, and in Sudan the outbreak of clashes in April that year between rival military factions and the subsequent economic collapse resulted in almost one-half of that country’s population being classified as acutely food insecure in July–September. Inflationary pressures on the prices of food, fuel and fertilizer, which many countries are obliged to import, continued to exacerbate the situation.</p>
     <p>The Editors are once again thankful to all the contributors for their articles and advice, and to the numerous governments and organizations that have returned questionnaires and provided statistical and other information.</p>
</region-overview>