<int-org-sectref id="SL1112063" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112062" slsdocid="1103278" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.279" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Justice, Migration and Home Affairs</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.105" usage="ewyb edio casee">Under the Treaty on European Union (TEU), EU member states undertook to co-operate in the areas of justice and home affairs, particularly in relation to the free movement of people between member states. Issues of common interest were defined as asylum policy; border controls; immigration; drug addiction; fraud; judicial co-operation in civil and criminal matters; customs co-operation; and police co-operation for the pur­poses of combating terrorism, drug trafficking and other serious forms of international crime.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.111" usage="ewyb edio casee">The EU’s Charter of Fundamental Rights (CFR), which was signed in December 2000, outlines the rights and freedoms recognized by the EU. It includes civil, political, economic and social rights, with each based on a previous charter, convention, treaty or jurisprudence. The CFR may be used to challenge decisions taken by the EU institutions and by member states when implementing EU law. A reference to the CFR, making it legally binding, was included in the Treaty of Lisbon, which entered into force in December 2009 (a protocol to the treaty limits the application of the CFR in Poland to rights recognized by national legislation in that country). In June 2005 the European Commission adopted a proposal for a regulation creating an EU Agency for Fundamental Rights. The Agency was established on 1 March 2007.</p>
                    <p>
          A European Police Office (EUROPOL), facilitating the exchange of information between police forces, operates from The Hague, Netherlands; a special unit dealing with the trafficking of illicit drugs and nuclear and radioactive materials began work in 1994. EUROPOL’s mandate has been extended to cover illegal immi­grants, stolen vehicles, paedophilia, terrorist activities, money laundering and counterfeiting of the euro and other means of payment. From January 2010 EUROPOL became a full EU agency, with a stronger mandate and enhanced capability for combating serious international crime and terrorism; it was officially renamed the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Co-operation in May 2017. A European Police College, now European Agency for Law Enforcement Training (CEPOL), was created in 2000, initially as a network of existing national training institutes; a permanent CEPOL institution was formally established as an EU agency in 2005, and relocated from the UK to Budapest, Hungary, in 2014. A Council Framework Decision on the European Arrest Warrant and Surrender Procedures between Member States entered into effect from January 2004. In 2021 a total of 14,789 European Arrest Warrants were issued.
          
                    </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.108" usage="ewyb edio casee">A regulation on the mutual recognition and enforcement throughout the EU of civil and commercial judgments made in the courts of member states came into force in March 2001 (except in Denmark). In 2000 a convention on mutual assistance in criminal matters between member states was adopted, and a European crime prevention network was formally established in May 2001. There are also agreements within the EU on co-operation between financial intelligence units and between police forces for the purposes of combating child pornography. In September 2001 member states harmonized their definitions of human trafficking and set common minimum prison sentences. In February 2002 the EU established a `Eurojust’ unit, composed of prosecutors, magistrates and police officers from member states, to help to co-ordinate prosecutions and support investigations into incidents of serious organized crime. In May 2009 the European Parliament (EP) adopted a resolution on the establishment of an EU criminal justice area. In May 2012 the EP adopted a resolution on criminal law, establishing criteria to determine the need for legislation on criminal law, and its quality. In October 2013 the EP adopted a resolution on organized crime, corruption and money laundering, and in October 2016 a resolution on efforts to combat corruption was adopted. In January 2020 the Commission established an EU Centre of expertise for victims of terrorism to offer advice and support to national authorities and organizations assisting victims. A roadmap to combat drug trafficking and criminal networks was issued by the Commission in October 2023, with targeted actions that included a new European Ports Alliance to assist customs authorities; measures to prevent organized crime; and the dismantling of criminal networks.</p>
                    <p>
          An EU Justice Scoreboard was introduced in 2013, which monitors justice reforms implemented by countries throughout the Union and evaluates the independence and quality of the justice systems of individual member states. The scoreboard forms part of the EU’s rule of law framework, which seeks to identify threats to the rule of law in member states and to prevent them from escalating to the extent that the Commission becomes obligated to activate mechanisms under the TEU. In December 2020 the EP approved a new rule of law regulation (Conditionality Regulation), which seeks to protect the EU’s financial interests (for example through the suspension of payments to member states) in the case of violations of the rule of law by member states, with effect from 1 January 2021. In February 2022 the European Court of Justice (ECJ) rejected complaints brought by Hungary and Poland against the regulation. In April the Commission formally notified Hungary that it was to initiate the conditionality mechanism in response to breaches of the rule of law by that country; the Commission reported in November that Hungary had not sufficiently implemented the necessary remedial measures, and in December the Council suspended some €6,300m. in budgetary commitments to the country. Meanwhile, in July and October 2021 Poland’s constitutional tribunal rejected ECJ demands that changes to Poland’s judicial system be suspended immediately (the changes were held to be a breach of the principle of the supremacy of EU law); the Commission began legal proceedings in December 2021 and in February 2023 referred Poland to the ECJ, which in June found in favour of the Commission. Funding from the Commission of some €35,400m. in COVID-19 recovery grants and loans had been withheld pending judical reform in Poland.
          
                         
                         
                    </p>
                    <p>In November 2017 the EU reached agreement on the establishment of a European Public Prosecutor’s Office (EPPO), as provided for under the Treaty of Lisbon. The EPPO was to be an independent, decentralized institution, in order to investigate serious cases of cross-border crime against the EU budget (for example fraud and corruption). In September 2019 the EP and the Council selected Laura Codruţa Kövesi as the first European Chief Prosecutor. The EPPO commenced operations in mid-2021, with the participation of 22 EU member states. </p>
                    <p>In December 2013 a Rights, Equality and Citizenship programme and a new Justice programme were adopted by the EP and the Council. In May 2018 the Commission proposed the establishment of a new Justice, Rights and Values fund, to simplify the existing structure. Spending under the Justice, Rights and Values heading of the long-term budget for 2021–27 was budgeted at some €841m., in 2018 prices. The new Justice programme was to continue efforts to create a European area of justice, on the basis of the rule of law, of trust and of mutual recognition. The Rights and Values programme included the issue of citizenship, as well as focusing on the promotion of equality and rights and combating violence.</p>
                    <p>In March 2021 the Commission published a new EU Strategy on the Rights of the Child, together with a European Child Guarantee, which sought to create a policy framework to protect the rights of all children, and to ensure the most vulnerable children were able to access basic services. In February 2024 the Commission published proposals to update legislation dating from 2011 on defining, preventing and prosecuting child sexual abuse.</p>
                    <p>In June 2023 the EU acceded to the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul Convention), which had entered into force on 1 August 2014 and which the EU had signed in June 2017. Under the EU’s Gender Equality Strategy 2020–25, in March 2022 the Commission adopted a proposal for a directive to combat violence against women and domestic violence. Political agreement on the proposed directive, which was to criminalize physical, psychological, economic and sexual violence against women, as well as female genital mutilation and forced marriage, and cyber-crimes such as online stalking and harassment, was reached between the EP and the Council in February 2024.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.113" usage="ewyb edio casee">
          Measures related to the abolition of customs formalities at intracommunity frontiers entered into force in January 1993. In June 1990 Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, meeting in Schengen, Luxembourg, signed a convention to implement a 1985 agreement abolishing frontier controls on the free movement of persons from 1993. Delay in the establishment of the Schengen Information System (SIS), providing a computer network on suspect persons or cargo for use by the police forces of signatory states, resulted in the postponement of its implementation. Seven countries (Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain) agreed to implement the agreement with effect from March 1995. Frontier controls at airports on those travelling between the seven countries were dismantled during a transition period, which ended on 1 July (France retained all of its land-border controls until March 1996). Italy joined the Schengen Group in October 1997, and Austria in December. Border controls for both countries were removed in 1998. Denmark, Finland and Sweden (and non-EU members Norway and Iceland) were admitted as observers of the accord from 1 May 1996, and all five countries joined the Schengen Group in March 2001. Meanwhile, in March 1999 signatories of the Schengen accords on visa-free border crossings began to waive visa requirements with Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. The Treaty of Amsterdam, which came into effect on 1 May, incorporated the so-called Schengen 
          <i>acquis</i>
           (comprising the 1985 agreement, 1990 convention and additional accession protocols and executive decisions), in order to integrate it into the framework of the EU. The treaty permitted Ireland to maintain permanent jurisdiction over its borders and rules of asylum and immigration, although in February 2002 the Council approved Ireland’s participation in some of the provisions of the 
          <i>acquis</i>
          . Countries acceding to the EU after 2000 were automatically to commit to the Schengen 
          <i>acquis</i>
          .
        </p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">
          Following the EU’s enlargement in May 2004, application of the Schengen 
          <i>acquis</i>
           by the newly admitted states was phased, as each new member state was first required to undergo an evaluation of its correct application of the 
          <i>acquis</i>
           in all areas, including management of land, air or sea borders, visas, security co-operation and personal data protection. Initially, therefore, border controls between the 15 existing members and the new members remained in force. The provisions of the Schengen 
          <i>acquis</i>
           were applied fully from December 2007 to the land and sea borders of nine of the countries that joined the EU in 2004, with controls at airports removed in March 2008. Non-EU member Switzerland joined the Schengen area in December 2008 and Liechtenstein in December 2011. Croatia joined in January 2023. In late 2023 agreement was reached on the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Schengen area. Air and maritime border controls were to be lifted in March 2024, pending a decision on the lifting of land border controls. Cyprus and Ireland remain outside the Schengen area. The original SIS was replaced by an expanded system, SIS II, in April 2013, which enables the exchange of information between border control mechanisms, police and customs authorities, with regard to, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , suspect or missing persons, misappropriated or lost identity documentation, vehicles, banknotes and firearms. 
        </p>
                    <p>The migration crisis affecting Europe in the wake of conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, together with concerns about increased terrorist activity in European capitals from 2015, posed a challenge to the Schengen Agreement; many countries temporarily reintroduced border controls, owing either to persistent `secondary movements’ of migrants, or to concerns relating to potential terrorist activity. In 2020–21, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Schengen member states imposed temporary border controls in an attempt to limit transmission of the virus.</p>
                    <p>A directive adopted in November 2003 permits third country nationals who have been resident in the EU for a period of five years to be granted the status of long-term residents. The Blue Card Directive was adopted in 2009, regulating conditions for entry and residence of highly qualified workers from outside the EU and establishing an EU-wide permit for such workers; Ireland and Denmark remained exempt from the provisions of the directive. In May 2016 a new directive was adopted regulating conditions for admission and residency for nationals from non-EU countries entering the EU for educational, research and training purposes (Ireland and Denmark remained exempt).</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.115" usage="ewyb edio casee">The Common European Asylum System (CEAS) comprises a legal framework on the asylum process, together with the European Asylum Support Office (EASO), launched in 2011. The Dublin III Regulation—which came into force in January 2014, replacing the (2003) Dublin II Regulation and the (1990) Dublin Convention on Asylum—asserts that responsibility for examining an asylum claim lies principally with the country playing the greatest role in an individual’s arrival into the EU, normally the country of entry. In June 2004 the Council adopted a decision concerning the development of the Visa Information System, a system for the exchange of visa data between member states. A Eurodac database, established in 2003, uses fingerprint comparisons to co-ordinate information on the movements of asylum seekers.</p>
                    <p>The European Migration Network was fully established following a Council directive adopted in May 2008, to provide current, comparable information on migration and asylum. The Qualification Directive, adopted by the Council in December 2011, establishes minimum standards for the qualification of third country nationals as refugees or as otherwise in need of international protection. In November 2011 the EU Immigration Portal was launched, to provide information for foreign nationals seeking to move to the EU, or to move between EU countries. A Single Permit Directive , adopted in December, established rights for non-EU workers residing lawfully in an EU member state. In June 2013 the Asylum Procedures Directive was adopted, which was fully implemented throughout the EU from July 2015. Other legislation adopted in 2013 included the Reception Conditions Directive, which replaced a 2003 directive establishing minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers.</p>
                    <p>An Asylum, Migration and Integration Fund (AMIF) was established to operate during 2014–20, focusing on: strengthening the common European asylum system by ensuring the uniform application of EU legislation; facilitating legal migration to EU member states in compliance with labour market requirements, and assisting with the integration of non-EU nationals; implementing fair, sustainable and effective return strategies, while working to combat illegal migration; and ensuring that those EU member states most severely affected by migration and asylum issues could benefit from solidarity from other EU member states. The AMIF was renewed for 2021–27, with a budget of €9,882m. (in current prices).</p>
                    <p>Amid an upsurge in asylum applications from 2015, large numbers of migrants, attempting to reach Europe via the Mediterranean Sea, continued to die at sea. Some EU member states, such as Greece, Italy and Hungary, were particularly affected by the unprecedented numbers of migrant arrivals, leading to concerns over the application of the Dublin III Regulation. In May 2015 the Commission published a new European Agenda on Migration, which incorporated proposals for the relocation within the EU of some 40,000 refugees from the Middle East and North Africa; the Justice and Home Affairs Council agreed in July to implement the Agenda. In September the Commission sought to introduce further emergency measures, including proposals to relocate an additional 120,000 migrants identified as in need of international protection, from Greece and Italy, over a three-year period; the Commission’s proposals, supported by the EP, were adopted by the Council in September. Meanwhile, an additional agreement, reached in July, provided for the resettlement of some 22,500 people from the Middle East, the Horn of Africa and North Africa. Some countries, such as Denmark, Ireland and Sweden, negotiated exemptions from fundamental aspects of EU immigration policy. Notably, several members states, including the Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania and Slovakia, objected to the EU’s response to the migration crisis. In April 2020 the Court of Justice ruled that the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland had violated the law by failing to fulfil their commitments under the EU’s migrant relocation scheme.</p>
                    <p>The European Agency for the Management of Operational Co-operation at the External Borders of the European Union (FRONTEX) was established in October 2004, to be primarily responsible for the creation of an integrated border management system. The Agency commenced operations on 1 May 2005, based in Warsaw, Poland. In December 2015 the Commission presented legislative proposals for the establishment of a European Border and Coast Guard. The proposals were formally adopted in September 2016 and the European Border and Coast Guard Agency was officially launched in October, retaining the acronym FRONTEX. Meanwhile, in February EU heads of government, meeting in Brussels, had expressed their commitment to the pursuit of Europe-wide, rather than unilateral, solutions to the ongoing migration crisis. In March the Council adopted a regulation establishing an emergency support mechanism to provide humanitarian assistance to member states during the European migration crisis. On 18 March a new agreement, the EU-Turkey Statement, was reached with Turkey (now known as Türkiye), according to which migrants crossing from Turkey into Greek territory, and considered not to be in immediate need of international protection, were to be returned to Turkey; the EU pledged to accept a Syrian refugee from within Turkey for each migrant returned to that country, and to provide some €6,000m. in assistance by the end of 2018. The agreement began to be implemented in April 2016. In May the Commission presented proposals for the reform of the Dublin III Regulation. In October the Council endorsed a tripartite approach for examining reform of the CEAS, focusing on the Eurodac regulation and the proposed establishment of an EU Agency for Asylum; the Dublin III Regulation and related directives and regulations; and examination of the Union Resettlement Framework, proposed by the Commission in July, and intended as a structured, longer-term policy on resettlement. In contravention of the EU-Turkey agreement, in February 2020 the Turkish Government announced that it would open the passage for migrants (following an escalation of the conflict in Syria, and an air strike that killed more than 30 Turkish soldiers). In March European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen pledged an additional €700m., together with a FRONTEX intervention force, to support Greek efforts to safeguard its border. The five-year EU-Turkey deal officially expired in early 2021.</p>
                    <p>In September 2018 plans were announced by the Commission further to reinforce both FRONTEX and the EASO. A new European Travel Information and Authorization System (ETIAS), proposed by the Commission in April 2016, was under development as part of the EU’s Security Union and in support of the European Agenda on Migration, to perform security checks in relation to visitors entering the Schengen area without a visa and to identify illegal migration and high epidemiological risk. It was subject to delays and was expected to become operational in 2025.</p>
                    <p>
           The Council reached agreement in June 2023 on the modernization of asylum and migration policies, which had initially been proposed by the Commission in September 2020 and was known as the New Pact on Migration and Asylum. 
          
                         
           Political agreement on the New Pact was reached in December 2023, and encompassed five new or revised regulations: on screening rules for non-EU nationals on arrival in the EU; on the further development of the Eurodac database to manage asylum applications; on symplifying asylum, return and border processes; on asylum and migrant management, aiming to create a more equitable system for burden sharing of migrants between EU countries; and on `crisis and force majeure’, to ensure the EU is prepared for crisis situations. An EU-Tunisia agreement was signed in July 2023, which included funding of some €127m. from the EU to help curb migration from North Africa (Tunisia having become a main departure point for migrants seeking a route to Europe). An agreement was made with Mauritania in March 2024, which included funding with the aim of helping to reduce irregular migration, the country being an embarkation point for small boats crossing from North Africa to the Canary Islands
          
           in Spain.
          
                    </p>
                    <p>
          Following the Russian Federation’s invasion of Ukraine in late February 2022, the EU announced that it was to activate its Temporary Protection Directive to facilitate the admission of Ukrainian refugees, and enable them to live, work and access social services in EU member states for a period of up to three years without having to make an application for asylum. Under the scheme, introduced in March, refugees from Ukraine were able to access, 
          <i>inter alia, </i>
          residence permits, housing, and access to labour markets, medical assistance and schooling for children. At November 2023 some 4.2m. people were covered under the Temporary Protection Directive, which in October had been extended until March 2025.
          
                    </p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>