<int-org-sectref id="SL1111987" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1111986" slsdocid="1103219" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.271" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Agriculture and Rural Development</heading>
                    
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.3" usage="ewyb edio casee">Agriculture and rural development remains the largest single item on the EU budget, although expenditure declined significantly between the mid-1980s and the mid-2010s. The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), which took effect from 1962, was devised to ensure food self-sufficiency for Europe following the food shortages of the post-war period and to ensure a fair standard of living for the agricultural community. Its objectives were described in the Treaty of Rome, now the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU. Markets for agricultural products were progres­sively organized following three basic principles: unity of the market (products must be able to circulate freely within the Union and markets must be organized according to common rules); EU preference (products must be protected from low-cost imports and from fluctuations on the world market); and common financial responsibility: the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF—which, with the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development, EAFRD, replaced the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund in 2007) finances the export of agricultural products to third countries, intervention measures to regulate agricultural markets, and direct payments to farmers.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.4" usage="ewyb edio">Serious reform of the CAP began in 1992, following criticism of the European Community’s agricultural and export subsidies. Reforms were adopted in May, which aimed to transfer the Community’s agricultural support from upholding prices to maintaining farmers’ incomes, thereby removing the incentive to overproduce. Intervention prices were reduced, and farmers were compensated by receiving additional grants, which, in the case of crops, took the form of a subsidy per hectare of land planted. To qualify for these subsidies, arable farmers (except for those with the smallest farms) were obliged to remove 15% of their land from cultivation (the `set-aside’ scheme). In March 1999 the European Council concluded an agreement on the Agenda 2000 programme, which aimed to reinforce Community policies and to restructure the financial framework of the EU with a view to enlargement. Rural development was designated the second `pillar’ of the CAP (the first pillar being income support to farmers and market management measures), and the continuing agricultural reform process placed particular emphasis on environmental concerns, safeguarding a fair income for farmers, streamlining legislation and decentralizing its application. Forestry was recognized as an integral part of rural development.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">The accession of 10 new states to the EU in May 2004 doubled the EU’s arable land area and its farming population. In October 2002 it was agreed that the enlargement process would be part-funded by a deal to maintain farm subsidies at 2006 levels until 2013, with a 1% annual correction for inflation, and that new members would be offered direct farm payments at 25% of the level paid to existing member states, rising to 100% over 10 years. A deal for CAP reform was formally adopted in September 2003. A Single Farm Payment, linked to environmental, food safety and animal welfare standards, replaced subsidies. Overall, 90% of direct payments to farmers were separated from production. However, obligatory `decoupling’ (severing the link between payments and production) was only partial for beef, cereal and mutton. Payments above €5,000 a year were progressively reduced in 2005–07. Under the principle of `modulation’, an increasing percentage of direct farm subsidies was retained by individual member states to finance rural development measures. The reforms provided for the equivalent of at least 80% of the funds gathered in each member state (90% in Germany) to be spent in that country. Implementation of the CAP reforms commenced on 1 January 2005.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">Meanwhile, in April 2004 agreement was reached for CAP reform of the olive oil, cotton, hops and tobacco sectors, extending the principle of decoupling aid from production to these commodities; a significant share of the existing production-linked payments were to be transferred to the Single Farm Payment, although production-linked subsidies were permitted. In September 2006 the European Court of Justice annulled the CAP provisions on cotton, and subsequently proposed maintaining the support arrangements agreed in 2004, while providing for additional funding in cotton producing regions.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio">The EU agreed reforms to the sugar industry in November 2005, following a World Trade Organization ruling that the existing level of subsidy breached legal limits. The EU produced large surpluses of sugar, which were disposed of on the world market to the detriment of more competitive producers, notably developing countries. The reforms, implemented over four years from July 2006, included the gradual reduction of the internal EU market price and compensatory direct aid payments to EU sugar producers. A restructuring fund, financed by sugar producers, was established to ease the transition to greater competitiveness. </p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio">
          New rules concerning the fruit and vegetable sector entered into force in January 2008, notably including the integration of the sector into the Single Farm Payment scheme; the requirement that producer organizations allocate at least 10% of their annual expenditure to environmental concerns; an increase in EU funding for the promotion of fruit and vegetable consumption and for organic production; and the abolition of export subsidies for fruit and vegetables. A regulation on the reform of the wine sector that was adopted in April provided, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , for the inclusion of the sector in the Single Farm Payment scheme and the phased withdrawal, by 2012, of distillation subsidies.
        </p>
                    <p>In November 2008 the European Council reached agreement on reforms for 2009–13, raising the rate of decoupling in countries that maintained the link between subsidy and production; providing for reform of the dairy sector; abolishing the set-aside scheme from 2009; and providing for a gradual reduction in payments to farms qualifying for subsidies, so that by 2012 10% of funds (rather than 5%) would be transferred to the rural development budget. </p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">In December 2013 the Council formally adopted four basic regulations providing for a simplified, reformed CAP, to be implemented during 2014–20; this prioritized greater transparency and the promotion of long-term sustainability, competitiveness and diversity of the agricultural sector. The budget for agricultural research and innovation was to be increased twofold, supported by a new European Innovation Partnership. The distribution of direct payments was to be made more equitable: by 2019 no single member state was to receive less than 75% of the EU average; only practising farmers were to be eligible for income support, and incentives were to be introduced to encourage younger farmers to enter the sector. Sugar quotas were to be removed by the end of 2017 (milk quotas expired in 2015). Under the reforms the Commission could intervene temporarily to manage the volume of agricultural products in the market; a `crisis reserve’ was to be established; and farmers were encouraged to take part in risk prevention schemes. A `greening’ component was to reward environmental competitiveness by directing up to 30% of the value of direct payments towards improved use of natural resources, through crop diversification; the preservation of grassland; and the conservation of areas of ecological interest. The Single Farm Payment was replaced by the Basic Payment Scheme from 2015; however, the transitional Single Area Payments Scheme, which had been introduced to administer payments to the member states that acceded in 2004 and 2007, would remain in place until 2020.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.27" usage="ewyb edio">An agreement on welfare, which came into effect in 1996, limited transportation of livestock to a maximum of eight hours in any 24-hour period, and stipulated higher standards for their accommodation and care while in transit. A ban on veal crates came into effect in January 1998. A directive establishing minimum standards for the welfare of farm animals was adopted by the Council in July. In April 2001 the Commission adopted new rules for long-distance animal transport. A new regulation further improving the welfare of animals during transportation was adopted in December 2004. In June 1999 EU ministers responsible for agriculture agreed to end egg production from hens kept in barren battery cages from 1 January 2012. A directive laying out minimum standards for the protection of pigs was applicable from January 2003 to newly built or rebuilt holdings, and from January 2013 to all holdings. A similar directive was adopted in June 2007 for the protection of chickens kept for meat production.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.26" usage="ewyb edio">The EU has adopted a number of protective measures to prevent the introduction of organisms harmful to plants. Regulations governing the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) into the environment have been in force since October 1991. An updated directive took effect in October 2002. A further regulation adopted in January 2004 specified a system to identify and trace each GMO product used in the production of food and animal feeds, completing the EU’s regulatory framework on the authorization, labelling and traceability of GMOs. By June 2009 15 EU member states had adopted specific legislation on the co-existence of GMOs with conventional and organic crops. In 2015 a directive modified earlier legislation on GMO crops, to grant member states greater flexibility in deciding whether to cultivate particular GMO crops.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio">In 2004 the Commission, with support from the Council, presented a European action plan for organic food and farming, aimed at promoting the development of organic farming in the EU. A regulation on organic production and labelling came into force from January 2009. Rules regulating imports of organic foods were approved in December 2006. From July 2010 all pre-packaged EU organic products were required to carry an EU organic food logo. In May 2018 the Council adopted a regulation providing for new legislation on organic farming, which entered into force at the beginning of 2022, providing for increased controls to help strengthen consumer confidence in organic food production, new rules to assist smaller producers in the conversion to organic farming, new regulations on imports in order to ensure that organic food sold in the EU is of an equitable standard, and an extended range of products that can be marketed as organic.</p>
                    <p>
          In June 2018 the European Commission published proposals for the CAP in 2021–27. The proposals envisaged a CAP budget representing almost one-third of the total EU budget, to be split between direct support for farmers and market measures, and rural development; greater support per hectare would be provided for small and medium-sized farms, and member states would have increased flexibility to transfer a percentage of their CAP allocations between direct payments and rural development, and to environmental and climate measures. In December 2020 a CAP budget (in current prices) of some €386,600m. for 2021–27 was approved. The implementation of the proposed reforms, including efforts to improve environmental, economic and social sustainability as part of the EU’s new environmental strategy, the European Green Deal (see 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="WB02048.IO.TXT.283">
                              <i>Energy, Environment and Climate</i>
                         </xr>
          ), were postponed until 1 January 2023, owing to ongoing negotiations between the European Parliament and the Council. In the mean time, existing CAP measures remained in place. In June 2021 the two institutions concluded a provisional political agreement on the new CAP, which was formally adopted in December. During 2023–27 the CAP was to focus on 10 principal objectives: ensuring a fair income for agricultural workers; competitiveness; improving the position of farmers in relation to the food value chain; action to combat climate change; care of the environment; preservation of landscapes; generational renewal; protecting rural areas; protecting both food quality and health; and fostering knowledge and innovation. Twenty-eight CAP strategic plans were designed and approved (one for each member state, with two for Belgium) in the context of these objectives and the new CAP began on 1 January 2023. Green Deal targets for 2030 were included in the so-called Farm to Fork Strategy, announced by the Commission in May 2020, focusing on sustainability in food production, distribution and consumption, as well as on reducing food waste, and on the EU’s Biodiversity Strategy for 2030. The new CAP provided for a more equitable division of CAP income support, with member states expected to allocate 10% of their direct payments to a redistributive income support tool, to allow for higher payments for smaller-scale farmers.
        </p>
                    <p>
          Following lobbying from farmers’ representatives and a number of intense protests in early 2024 by farmers in many EU member states (
          
          including demonstrations in the centre of Brussels during European Council meetings) against what were perceived to be unfair farming and environmental policies, reduced payments for farm products and cheap imports of agricultural products, in March the Commission outlined proposals to review parts of the CAP to increase flexibility and reduce administrative burdens on small farmers.
        </p>
                    
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>