<int-org-sectref id="SL1112156" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112155" slsdocid="1103465" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.296" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio mena sasia">
                    <heading>Aid to Developing and Non-EU Countries</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.269" usage="ewyb edio">The main channels for EU aid to developing countries have been the Cotonou Agreement and the Mediterranean Financial Protocols, but technical and financial aid and assistance for refugees, training, trade promotion and co-operation in indus­try, energy, science and technology are also provided to about 30 countries in Asia and Latin America. The European Commission’s Directorate-General for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations (DG ECHO), established in 1991 as the Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection Office, co-ordinates the provision of emergency humanitarian assistance and food aid. ECHO, based in Brussels, which became fully operational in 1993, finances operations conducted by non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and international agencies, with which it works in partnership. In 2007 the Commission adopted a European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid, which established an EU policy framework for responding to humanitarian crises. Relations between ECHO and its partners are governed by Framework Partnership Agreements (FPAs), which define roles and responsibilities in the implementation of humanitarian operations financed by the EU. ECHO aims to meet the immediate needs of victims of natural and man-made disasters worldwide, in such areas as assisting displaced persons, health and mine-clearing programmes.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio">
          The Union Civil Protection Mechanism (UCPM) was established in 2001 to improve prevention of, preparedness for and protection against natural and manmade disasters within Europe and beyond; participants comprise all EU member states, as well as Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Iceland, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Norway, Serbia and Türkiye
          
           (formerly known as Turkey). The UCPM’s budget for 2021–27 amounted to €3,300m., encompassing its Multi-annual Financial Framework and Next Generation EU allocations (the latter allocations to assist member states’ recovery following the COVID-19 pandemic). An Emergency Response Co-ordination Centre was established in May 2013.
        </p>
                    <p usage="ass mena sasia">The European Commission’s Directorate-General for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations (DG ECHO) was established in 1991 as the Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection Office, with a mandate to co-ordinate the provision of emergency humanitarian assistance and food aid. ECHO, which became fully operational in 1993 and is based in Brussels, Belgium, finances operations conducted by NGOs and international agencies, with which it works in partnership. </p>
                    
                    <p usage="ass">
          ECHO’s initial humanitarian aid budget for 2024 amounted to €1,800m., of which €546m. was allocated to sub-Saharan Africa; aid was to target conflict, food insecurity, health, climate change and forced displacement of people; and countries affected by extreme weather events.
          
                    </p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio">ECHO’s initial humanitarian aid budget for 2024 amounted to €1,800m., of which €546m. was allocated to Africa, €470m. to the Middle East and North Africa, €297m. to Asia, Latin America, the Pacific and the Caribbean, and €115m. to Ukraine, the Western Balkans and the Caucasus. A total of €413m. was for non-geographical allocations (including €315m. for unforeseen humanitarian emergencies).</p>
                    <p usage="mena">In 2024 ECHO in its initial budget allocated almost €470m. in humanitarian funding to the Middle East and North Africa, principally for the relief of extreme humanitarian need in the Gaza Strip and the Palestinian civilian population, and to those affected by conflict and insecurity in Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen and neighbouring countries.</p>
                    <p usage="fea sasia">In 2024 funds totalling €297m. were allocated in ECHO’s initial budget to Asia, Latin America, the Pacific and the Caribbean; €186m. in humanitarian assistance was allocated to South Asia and the Pacific.</p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>