<int-org-sectref id="SL1112101" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112100" slsdocid="1103350" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.286" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Economic Co-operation</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.184" usage="ewyb edio casee">A review of the economic situation is presented annually by the Commission, analysing recent developments and short- and medium-term prospects. Economic policy guidelines for the following year are adopted annually by the Council.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.185" usage="edio casee">The following objectives for the end of 1973 were agreed by the Council in 1971, as the first of three stages towards European economic and monetary union: the narrowing of exchange rate margins to 2.25%; creation of a medium-term pool of reserves; co-ordination of short- and medium-term economic and budgetary policies; a joint position on international monetary issues; har­mon­ization of taxes; cre­ation of the European Monetary Co-operation Fund (EMCF); and creation of the European Regional Development Fund.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.187" usage="edio casee">The narrowing of exchange margins (the `snake’) came into effect in 1972; however, Denmark, France, Ireland, Italy and the UK later floated their currencies, with only Denmark perma­nently returning to the arrangement. Sweden withdrew from the arrangement in August 1977, and Norway withdrew in December 1978.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.188" usage="ewyb edio casee">The European Monetary System (EMS) came into force in March 1979, with the aim of creating closer monetary co-operation, leading to a zone of monetary stability in Europe, principally through an Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM), supervised by the ministries of finance and the central banks of member states. Greece did not join the ERM, Spain joined in June 1989, the UK in October 1990 and Portugal in April 1992. To prevent wide fluctuations in the value of members’ currencies against each other, the ERM fixed for each currency a central rate in European Currency Units (ECUs, see below), based on a `basket’ of national currencies; a reference rate in relation to other currencies was fixed for each currency, with established fluctuation margins. Central banks of the participating states intervened by buying or selling currencies when the agreed margin was likely to be exceeded. Each member placed 20% of its gold reserves and dollar reserves, respectively, into the EMCF, and received a supply of ECUs to regulate central bank interventions. Short- and medium-term credit facilities supported the balance of payments of member countries. However, the exchange rates of non-Community currencies fluctuated widely, and economic development varied among member states, leading to nine realignments of currencies in 1979–83. In 1992–93 there was great pressure on currency markets, and in September 1992 Italian and British membership of the ERM was suspended; the UK remained outside the ERM, but the Italian lira was readmitted in November 1996. In July 1993, as a result of intensive currency speculation on European financial markets, the ERM almost collapsed. In response, EC ministers responsible for finance decided to widen the fluctuation margins allowed for each currency, except in the cases of Germany and the Netherlands, which agreed to maintain their currencies within the original limits. In practice, most currencies remained within the former narrower bands during 1994. Austria joined the EMS in January 1995; Finland joined in October 1996. Sweden remained outside the EMS.</p>
                    <p id="WB02047.TXT.66000" usage="casee ewyb edio">The Treaty on European Union came into force on 1 November 1993, providing for Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) to be implemented in three stages, with the gradual introduction of a single currency, to be administered by a single central bank. In December 1995 the European Council confirmed that Stage III of EMU was to begin on 1 January 1999 and that the new single currency would be known as the euro. Member countries remaining outside the monetary system would remain part of the single market. At a meeting of the European Council in Dublin, Ireland, in December 1996 the heads of government endorsed the new ERM and the legal framework for the euro, and approved the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), intended to ensure that member countries maintained strict budgetary discipline. In March 1998 Greece was admitted to the ERM, causing a 14% devaluation of its national currency. In May a meeting of heads of state and of government agreed that existing ERM central rates were to be used to determine the final rates of exchange between national currencies and the euro. A European Central Bank (ECB) was established in June.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.191" usage="ewyb edio casee">In May 1998 heads of state and of government confirmed that 11 countries would take part in Stage III of EMU. On 31 December ministers responsible for economic and financial affairs adopted the conversion rates for the national currencies of the countries participating in the single currency. The euro was formally launched on 1 January 1999, together with the ERM’s successor, ERM-II. Greece and Denmark joined ERM-II, but in September 2000 Danish voters participating in a national referendum rejected the adoption of the euro. On 1 January 2001 Greece became the 12th EU member state to adopt the euro. A national referendum held in Sweden in September 2003 rejected the adoption of the euro. The UK also declined to participate.</p>
                    <p id="WB02047.TXT.69000" usage="casee ewyb edio">Under the original terms of the SGP, member states were obliged to keep budget deficits to within 3% of gross domestic product (GDP), or have fines imposed, and to bring their budgets close to balance by 2004 (later extended by two years). Greece received a formal warning from the Commission in December 2004 for publishing inaccurate data concerning its public finances for 1997–2003.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">The countries that joined the EU on 1 May 2004 (Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia) were obliged to participate in EMU; however, adoption of the euro was dependent on the fulfilment of the same Maastricht convergence criteria as the initial entrants, which comprised conditions regarding inflation, debt, budget deficit, long-term interest rates and exchange rate stability. The exchange rate criteria included the requirement to spend at least two years in ERM-II. Although the currency was permitted to fluctuate by 15% either side of a central rate or, by common agreement, within a narrower band, the ECB specified that the limit of 2.25% would be applied when judging whether countries had achieved sufficient stability to join the eurozone. Progress towards adoption of the euro varied significantly. Slovenia adopted the euro on 1 January 2007; Cyprus and Malta were admitted on 1 January 2008, Slovakia on 1 January 2009, Estonia on 1 January 2011, Latvia on 1 January 2014 and Lithuania on 1 January 2015. Croatia, which joined the EU in July 2013, was admitted to the eurozone on 1 January 2023, by which time there were 20 participating countries. Upon admission to the eurozone, the central bank of the participating state automatically became part of the Eurosystem (which also comprises the ECB). Meanwhile, the European System of Central Banks also includes the central banks of member states that remain outside the euro area.</p>
                    <p>In 2008 a sharp contraction in global credit markets prompted EU Governments to offer widespread financial assistance to support failing banks amid the onset of recession throughout the EU. In October the President of the European Commission established a high-level group on financial supervision in the EU. Shortly afterwards, the heads of state or of government of the eurozone countries issued a Declaration on a Concerted European Action Plan of the Euro Area Countries, outlining measures to ensure liquidity for financial institutions and co-operation among European states. In October the Commission proposed a revision to the deposit guarantee schemes directive, which would increase the minimum protection for bank deposits to €100,000. In December the European Council approved a European Economic Recovery Plan (EERP), outlining a co-ordinated three-part response to the crisis, based on a new European financial market architecture; a framework plan for the recovery of the real economy; and a global response to the financial crisis. The EERP was worth around €200,000m., equivalent to some 1.5% of the EU’s total GDP. In January 2009 the Commission adopted decisions aimed at strengthening the supervisory framework for EU financial markets.</p>
                    <p>The estimated 12.7% Greek budgetary deficit for 2009 was deemed potentially destabilizing to markets and to the eurozone. In January 2010 the ECOFIN Council advised the Greek Government to embrace a far-reaching economic reform plan aimed at gradually reducing Greece’s budget deficit. The Commission endorsed the plan in February and, using new powers given under the Treaty of Lisbon, imposed a new `quasi-permanent’ surveillance system on the management of Greece’s public finances. Furthermore, the Commission issued a formal warning to the Greek authorities regarding the need to pursue policies consistent with the broad economic guidelines adopted by the Council, and launched infringement proceedings against Greece relating to the submission of erroneous statistical data. In May 2010 the European Commission, the ECB and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) reached agreement with Greece on a programme intended to stabilize the Greek economy, in accordance with which funding of €110,000m. would be provided over a period of three years, of which €80,000m. was to originate from the countries of the eurozone. In accordance with the terms of the programme, Greece was required to implement further budget cuts, increase taxation, and reform the pensions and social security systems.</p>
                    <p>In July 2011 EU ministers responsible for finance approved the disbursement of further lending to Greece, temporarily alleviating the threat of default. In October EU leaders agreed further emergency measures designed to help to resolve the eurozone debt crisis. The agreement provided for the recapitalization of private banks; provided for losses of one-half of the banks’ holdings of Greek debt; and increased the financial strength of the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF—see below). In March 2012 EU finance ministers approved further lending to Greece by the EU, the ECB and the IMF (known as the troika), worth some €130,000m., in addition to the funds already committed, but not yet disbursed. In November new stringent measures were approved by Greece, and were followed by the adoption of a revised austerity budget. In December the troika approved the second disbursement under the economic adjustment programme; under revised targets, debt was to be reduced to 124% of GDP (rather than 120%) by 2020, and the troika agreed to provide €26,000m. in additional financing for 2012–16, and to cover further gaps provided that the programme was implemented. Greece defaulted on a repayment to the IMF at the end of June, and capital controls were imposed. In July Greece made a formal request for additional lending under the European Stability Mechanism (ESM—see below). Eurozone ministers of finance and heads of state and of government reached provisional agreement on new lending, subject to the implementation of additional austerity measures. In August the Board of Governors of the ESM approved the new lending to Greece, worth up to €86,000m. over a period of three years. In August 2018 Greece successfully exited its bailout arrangement with the EU.</p>
                    <p>Ireland, Portugal and Spain also required EU funding in the wake of the economic crisis. In June 2012 Cyprus became the fifth member of the eurozone to seek emergency EU funding, and an agreement was reached with the EU in March 2013 on the terms required for the disbursement of lending. In September 2012 the President of the ECB announced a new outright monetary transactions programme (an unlimited bond-buying programme), under which the ECB guaranteed that it would purchase eurozone countries’ short-term bonds, if required, in order to reduce the market rates of interest for countries encountering speculation that they might be compelled to leave the eurozone. A programme of quantitative easing, the Public Sector Purchase Programme, was launched in March 2015.</p>
                    <p>In May 2010 eurozone member states agreed to the establishment of a new, temporary institution, the EFSF, with a lending capacity of €4,400m., which aimed to maintain financial stability in the eurozone through the provision of rapid financial assistance to member countries. In late June heads of state and of government agreed to expand the EFSF’s remit and increase its guarantee commitments from €4,400m. to €7,800m. The EFSF’s scope was further expanded in late July, and all amendments to the EFSF Framework entered into force in mid-October 2011. The EFSF, based in Luxembourg, was backed by guarantees from 14 of the eurozone’s then 17 members (Greece, Ireland and Portugal were exempted). Meanwhile, in October 2010 the European Council had agreed to establish a permanent crisis mechanism, the ESM, to safeguard the financial stability of the eurozone. Combined with strengthened economic governance and monitoring, the ESM, which was to have an overall lending capacity of €500,000m., aimed to prevent the development of future crises. In late July 2011 EU heads of state and of government taking part in an emergency Euro Area Summit in Brussels agreed to reduce EFSF interest rates and extend the maturities of future loans issued to Greece, Ireland and Portugal, in an effort to strengthen their financial programmes. In February 2012 representatives of the eurozone countries, meeting in Brussels, signed a treaty providing for the establishment of the ESM, which was inaugurated on 8 October. The EFSF and the associated European Financial Stabilization Mechanism remained responsible only for lending approved prior to the establishment of the ESM.</p>
                    <p>
          Meanwhile, in December 2011 the majority of EU member states had reached agreement in principle on new fiscal arrangements, designed to increase fiscal discipline and convergence in the eurozone. The Treaty on Stability, Co-ordination and Governance in the Economic and Monetary Union, including the so-called fiscal compact (non-binding for countries outside the eurozone), 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , required member states to maintain a balanced budget (or a deficit of no more than 0.5% of nominal GDP). Agreement was reached on increased co-operation on economic policy and an acceleration of arrangements for the introduction of the ESM. In March 2012 25 heads of state and of government signed the new treaty, which entered into force on 1 January 2013. (Croatia and the Czech Republic acceded to the treaty in 2018–19.)
        </p>
                    <p>In December 2011 new rules, comprising five regulations and one directive (the `six-pack’), came into effect, applying to both the procedures within the SGP that are designed to prevent excessive deficits, and the excessive deficit procedure (EDP), which is the corrective branch of the pact. New measures, specifically financial disincentives and fines, were to be applied to non-compliant eurozone members in an effort to strengthen the efficacy of the SGP. At the end of May supplementary governance reform measures, known as the `two-pack’, entered into force throughout the eurozone. The new measures sought to ensure increased transparency for budgetary decisions, to strengthen co-ordination in the eurozone from 2014, and to recognize its particular needs. They also prepared the way for the possible introduction of additional measures to reinforce EMU at supranational level.</p>
                    <p>In December 2012 EU ministers responsible for finance approved plans for the establishment of a banking union, comprising (i) a single European framework for the supervision of banks, and an associated set of harmonized banking regulations; (ii) a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) to govern and co-ordinate the provision (or withdrawal) of support for failing banks, by means of levies on the sector, rather than through public financing; and (iii) a common system for the protection of bank deposits throughout the EU. Accordingly, the Council endorsed plans for the ECB’s powers to be considerably expanded, to enable it to act as a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), with responsibility for the supervision of major banks (those with assets of either more than €30,000m., or equivalent to 20% of national GDP) in operation throughout the eurozone. The SSM was to co-operate closely with national regulatory authorities, with the aim of safeguarding financial stability. With the appointment of a banking supervisor for the eurozone, the ESM would be able to disburse funds directly to banks, rather than through individual central banks. The establishment of an ECB-led SSM was formally approved in October 2013 and it came into operation in November 2014. The SRM had been approved by the European Parliament (EP) in April, and entered into operation in January 2016.</p>
                    <p>In mid-2015 the Presidents of the Commission, the European Council, the EP, the informal Eurogroup of eurozone ministers of finance and the ECB published a report (the `Five Presidents’ Report’) on completing EMU, which comprised a planned programme of reform to secure the objective of full economic, financial, fiscal and political union, in three stages, by 2025. The Commission launched Stage 1 of the process of completing EMU in July 2015. In November the Commission proposed the establishment of a European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS), which, it was envisaged, would serve as the third `pillar’ of the banking union by means of a three-stage process: the introduction of a reinsurance scheme over a period of three years, a subsequent four-year co-insurance scheme and, finally, full insurance. The Commission also published a communication, `Towards the Completion of the Banking Union’, which proposed improved economic governance, together with the creation of national Competitiveness Boards and a European Fiscal Board, in an advisory role, as well as a more integrated external representation of the eurozone at international financial institutions, in particular the IMF. In March 2017 the leaders of the EU member states and of the principal EU institutions signed the Rome Declaration, in the Italian capital, committing themselves to the completion of EMU by 2025. In December 2018 the eurozone heads of state and of government endorsed plans to reform the ESM; in early 2021 ESM member countries signed an agreement amending the ESM treaty; at early 2024 the treaty was awaiting ratification by Italy, the only ESM country not yet to have done so.</p>
                    <p>On 12 March 2020, in response to the economic disruption caused throughout the EU by the COVID-19 pandemic, the ECB announced an expansion of its programme of quantitative easing. Following a more significant curtailment of consumer and economic activity throughout EU member states amid the spread of the pandemic, on 18 March the ECB announced the launch of a temporary Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme, a new asset-purchasing scheme worth €750,000m. (increased to €1,350,000m. in June), together with a commitment to protect the eurozone. On 23 March EU ministers of finance agreed to implement a so-called escape clause, permitting the suspension of the SGP until at least 2022, in order to allow member states to undertake the measures needed to mitigate the severe economic impact of the pandemic, even if the implementation of such measures would result in the violation of budgetary requirements under the EU’s fiscal framework. Additional emergency measures were agreed by eurozone ministers of finance in April 2020, including the proposed establishment of a specialized COVID-19 instrument to support the release of aid. In May proposals for a large-scale recovery plan for Europe were put forward by the Commission. A new temporary recovery instrument, Next Generation EU, was proposed, and was adopted in December which, in conjunction with agreement on a strengthened Multi-annual Financial Framework for 2021–27, was to support the creation of a Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF), worth some €672,500m. in loans and grants to aid economic recovery from the COVID-19 crisis. In addition, REACT EU was to provide targeted crisis response and recovery measures by supplementing proposed cohesion funding for 2021–27. The Commission also proposed increased funding for the so-called Just Transition Mechanism (a €100,000m. fund conceived in January 2020 as part of the European Green Deal Investment Plan) and the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development. Other measures were put forward to stimulate the economy by facilitating investment through the establishment of a Solvency Support Instrument, an expansion of the Invest EU facility and the introduction of a new Strategic Investment Facility. In February 2021 the Council adopted a regulation establishing the RRF, to run until the end of 2026. By the end of May the ratification by member states of the own resources decision confirming national spending commitments was complete.</p>
                    <p>The Commission outlined proposed reforms to the SGP and the EU economic governance framework in April 2023, which aimed to promote sustainable growth as well as debt sustainability. The proposals encompassed: replacing the regulation on the surveillance of economic policies; amending the regulation on the SGP EDP; and amending the directive on member state budgetary frameworks requirements. The Council in December agreed on a new SGP framework, whereby the reference values of a budget deficit of below 3% of GDP and a debt-to-GDP ratio of below 60% would remain unchanged, but individual member states’ medium-term fiscal and structural plans would be taken into account within a common EU framework. Member states with a debt-to-GDP ratio above 90% would be obliged to reduce the ratio by an annual average of 1% within four–five years (with the potential to extend the timeframe to seven years), while those with a ratio of 60%–90% would need to reduce the ratio by 0.5% per year. Provisional political agreement between the Council and the EP on the revised SGP proposals was reached in February 2024.</p>
                    
                    
                    <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.287" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                         <heading>The Euro</heading>
                         <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.194" usage="edio ewyb">With the creation of the EMS in 1979, a new monetary unit, the ECU, was adopted. Its value and composition were identical to those of the European Unit of Account (EUA) already used in the administrative fields of the Community. The ECU was a composite monetary unit, in which the relative value of each currency was determined by the gross national product and the volume of trade of each country. Assigned the function of the unit of account used by the European Monetary Co-operation Fund, the ECU was also used as the denominator for the ERM; as the denominator for operations in both the intervention and the credit mechanisms; and as a means of settlement between mone­tary authorities of the European Community. From April 1979 the ECU was also used as the unit of account for the purposes of the Common Agricultural Policy. From 1981 it replaced the EUA in the general budget of the Community.</p>
                         <p usage="edio">From September 1989 the Portuguese and Spanish currencies were included in the composition of the ECU. The composition of the ECU `basket’ of national currencies was frozen from the entry into force of the Treaty on European Union on 1 November 1993 until the termination of the ECU on 31 December 1998. (Consequently, the currencies of Austria, Finland and Sweden, on those countries’ accession to the EU, were not represented in the ECU basket.)</p>
                         <p usage="edio ewyb">As part of Stage III of the process of EMU, the ECU was replaced by a single currency, the euro (€), on 1 January 1999, at a conversion rate of 1:1. Initially, the euro was used for cashless payments and accounting purposes, while the traditional national currencies, then considered as `sub-units’ of the euro, continued to be used for cash payments. On 1 January 2002 euro coins and banknotes entered into circulation in the then 12 participating countries and, by the end of February, the former national currencies of all of the participating countries had been withdrawn. The euro’s value in national currencies is calculated and pub­lished daily, and stood at €1 = US $1.0907 on 21 March 2024, when there were 20 participating countries.</p>
                         
                         <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.201" usage="ewyb edio">A payments settlement system, known as TARGET (Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross Settlement Express Transfer), was introduced for countries participating in EMU on 4 January 1999. An upgraded version of the system, TARGET2, was launched in November 2007. The Single Euro Payments Area, which was introduced gradually from 2008, was designed to enable all electronic payments across the eurozone to be made as efficiently and securely as domestic payments within a single member state.</p>
                         <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.202" usage="ewyb edio">
            Three interest rates are set for the eurozone: the rate on the main refinancing operations, providing most of the banking system’s liquidity; the rate on the deposit facility, which may be used by banks making overnight deposits with the euro system; and the rate on the marginal lending facility, which offers overnight credit to banks from the euro system. From October 2008 refinancing oper­ations were conducted through a fixed-rate tender procedure, having been conducted as variable rate tenders since June 2000. During the second half of 2008 and early 2009 the ECB considerably reduced interest rates with the aim of stimulating non-inflationary growth and contributing to financial stability. The ECB reduced the fixed refinancing rate progressively from 3.75% in October 2008 to 1.0% at 13 May 2009 (that rate remaining in force until 13 April 2011). The rates set in 2009 represented the lowest eurozone rates (whether variable or fixed) set in the decade from January 1999. The fixed refinancing rate was 0.75% at 11 July 2012 and 0.05% by 10 September 2014. The ECB reduced the fixed refinancing rate to 0.00% with effect from 16 March 2016. It increased to 0.50% at 27 July 2022 and continued to rise thereafter; it was 4.50% 
            
            from 20 September 2023.
            
                         </p>
                         
                    </int-org-section>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>