<int-org-sectref id="SL1112076" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112075" slsdocid="1103324" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.281" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.130" usage="ewyb edio casee">
          The Single European Act, which entered into force in 1987, added to the original Treaty of Rome articles that emphasized the need for economic and social cohesion in the Community, i.e. the reduction of disparities between the various regions. This was to be achieved principally through the existing structural funds—the 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="WB02049.IO.TXT.24">European Regional Development Fund</xr>
          , the 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="WB02049.IO.TXT.25">European Social Fund (ESF)</xr>
          , and the Guidance Section of the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund, which was replaced by the 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="WB02049.IO.TXT.23.12">European Fund for Agricultural Development</xr>
           in 2007. In 1988 the Council declared that Community operations through the structural funds, the European Investment Bank and other financial instruments should have five priority objectives: promoting the development and structural adjustment of the less developed regions (where gross domestic product per head was less than 75% of the Community average); converting areas seriously affected by industrial decline; combating long-term unemployment among people above the age of 25 years; providing employment for young people (under the age of 25 years); and agricultural reform.
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.131" usage="ewyb edio casee">In 1989 the Commission proposed a Charter of Fundamental Social Rights of Workers (later known as the Social Charter), covering freedom of movement, fair remuneration, improvement of working conditions, the right to social security, freedom of association and collective wage agreements, the development of participation by workers in management, and sexual equality. The Charter was approved (with some modifications) by the heads of government of all Community member states, except the UK, in December. The chapter on social affairs of the Treaty on European Union, negotiated in December 1991, was omitted to form a separate protocol (the Social Charter). A directive ensuring equal treatment for part-time employees was adopted by the Council in December 1997. A directive on parental leave, the second direct­ive to be adopted under the Social Charter, providingfor a statutory minimum of three months’ unpaid leave to allow parents to care for young children, was adopted in June 1996. The Treaty of Amsterdam, which entered into force in May 1999, removed the opt-out clause and incorporated the Social Charter in the revised Treaty of Rome (the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union).</p>
                    <p>
          The EU’s Europe 2020 initiative was adopted by the Council in June 2010; Europe 2020 sought to ensure that by 2020 at least 75% of those aged between 20 and 64 years were in employment. In April 2012, in response to high rates of unemployment, the European Commission launched a new Employment Package; in December a Youth Employment Package for 2014–20 was announced. In April 2013 the Council adopted the so-called Youth Guarantee, a programme to be partly financed by the ESF, seeking to ensure that all people under the age of 25 years had access to employment, further education or a training scheme within four months of becoming unemployed or leaving education. In June 2019 the Council adopted a directive on transparent and predictable working conditions in the EU, which introduced additional minimum rights for workers. In July 2020 the Commission presented a five-year plan, the European Skills Agenda for sustainable competitiveness, social fairness and resilience, which aimed to improve existing skills and support reskilling. The overall EU unemployment rate was 6.0% in January 2024, when the rate of unemployment in the eurozone was 6.4%
          
           . In June 2019 the Council and the European Parliament (EP) reached provisional agreement on a new draft directive on ensuring adequate statutory minimum wages throughout the EU; the directive was adopted in October, giving member states two years to transpose the directive into national law.
        </p>
                    <p>The European Globalization Adjustment Fund (EGF) was established in 2007 to support workers who experience dismissal as a result of business measures linked to globalization. Since 2021 the EGF supports those also affected by technological and environmental factors.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.134" usage="ewyb edio casee">The Treaty of Amsterdam authorized the European Council to take action against all types of discrimination. In June 2000 the Council adopted a directive implementing the principle of equal treatment, regardless of racial or ethnic origin in employment, education, social security, health care and access to goods and services. This was followed in November by a directive establishing a framework for equal treatment regardless of religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation. In June 2005 the Commission presented a framework strategy on non-discrimination and equal opportunities, aimed at ensuring the full implementation and enforcement by member states of anti-discrimination legislation. In March 2007 the EU Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA), based in Vienna, Austria, assumed the mandate of the former European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia (EUMC) and was also tasked with developing knowledge, expertise and work programmes in respect of other fundamental rights. The Agency maintains the European Information Network on Racism and Xenophobia. The European Institute for Gender Equality was founded in 2007, and is based in Vilnius, Lithuania.</p>
                    <p>In April 2010 the Commission issued a communication in support of the social and economic integration of the Roma community in Europe (which numbers between 10m. and 12m. people, and has encountered widespread discrimination). An EU Framework for National Roma Integration Strategies, adopted in April 2011, ran until 2020, and compelled each EU member state to develop a national strategy focused on the welfare of the Roma population. In October 2020 the Commission adopted a new 10-year Roma strategic framework for equality, inclusion, education, health, employment, housing and participation.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.135" usage="ewyb edio casee">Numerous directives on health and safety in the workplace have been adopted. The Major Accident Hazards Bureau (MAHB), which was established in 1996 and is based at the Joint Research Centre in Ispra, Italy, helps to prevent and mitigate industrial accidents in the EU. The MAHB maintains a Major Accident Reporting System database and a Community Documentation Centre on Industrial Risk. The European Agency for Health and Safety at Work was established in 1995 in Bilbao, Spain. The EU Strategic Framework on Health and Safety at Work for 2021–27 was adopted in part to address new risks, including those relating to changes in working practices, technological developments and the COVID-19 pandemic.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.1959" usage="ewyb edio casee">
          In June 1993 the Working Time Directive (WTD) was approved, restricting the working week to a maximum duration of 48 hours, except where overtime arrangements are agreed with trade unions; certain categories of employee were exempt from the 48-hour rule, including those in the transport sector, those employed in offshore oil extraction, fishermen and junior hospital doctors. The WTD also prescribed minimum rest periods and a minimum of four weeks’ paid holiday a year. The Charter of Fundamental Rights (CFR) of the EU, which asserts that all EU workers are entitled to limits on working hours, became legally binding in December 2009 with the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty (see also 
          <i>Justice, Migration and Home Affairs</i>
          ). In December 2023 new rules on the employment of platform workers (e.g. whether they should be classed as employed—and thus covered by labour and social protection laws—or self-employed) were provisionally agreed by the Council and the EP
          
           .
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.136" usage="ewyb edio casee">The European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions (Eurofound), which was established in Dublin, Ireland, in 1975, undertakes four-year research and development programmes in the fields of employment, sustainable development, equal opportunities, social cohesion, health and wellbeing, and partici­pation.</p>
                    <p>
          All 15 of the longer-standing members of the EU (EU-15), except the UK, Ireland and Sweden, imposed a period of restriction on immigrants from the eight formerly communist new member states (EU-8—the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovenia and Slovakia) following their accession to the EU in May 2004, owing to fears that their labour markets might be saturated with inexpensive labour. Workers from new member states Malta and Cyprus were allowed unrestricted freedom of movement. All EU-15 states were required to apply EU legislation on free movement and open their labour markets to the EU-8 in 2011, and EU labour markets were opened to workers from Bulgaria and Romania in January 2014. A European Commission report published in 2009 estimated that the number of EU-8 nationals residing in EU-15 countries had risen from around 900,000 before enlargement to some 1.9m. by 2007, with Ireland and the UK as their main destinations; meanwhile
          
          , the number of Bulgarian and Romanian workers resident in EU-15 states was estimated to have increased from about 700,000 to nearly 1.9m., with Italy and Spain as the principal destination countries. 
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.137" usage="ewyb edio casee">European Employment Services (EURES), launched in 1994, maintains a web portal and operates as a network of specialist advisers across Europe providing information, guidance and placement to both job seekers and employers interested in the European job market. The service covers the countries of the European Economic Area and Switzerland.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.2036" usage="ewyb edio casee">An advisory Social Protection Committee was established in June 2000. In addition, the EU administers the Mutual Information System on Social Protection in the EU member states, as well as Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland. In December 2013 the Council adopted a regulation on a new programme for Employment and Social Innovation (EaSI), which sought to support measures by member states to develop and implement social reforms, and incorporated earlier programmes on employment and social solidarity and on microfinance. From 2021 EaSI became part of the successor to the ESF, the European Social Fund Plus (ESP+).</p>
                    <p>A regulation establishing a Fund for European Aid to the Most Deprived (FEAD) was adopted in 2014 as a funding instrument to contribute to the Europe 2020 poverty-reduction target. It was simplified in 2018, and amended in April 2020 and February 2021, in response to the COVID-19 crisis.</p>
                    <p>In April 2020 the Commission proposed the establishment of a new instrument for temporary Support to mitigate Unemployment Risks in an Emergency (SURE). SURE, worth up to €100,000m., was intended to help to preserve employment during the COVID-19 pandemic, specifically by making loans available to member states, on favourable terms, to help them to mitigate the increases in public spending required to protect jobs. By the end of the instrument at the end of 2022, some €98,400m. had been disbursed to a total of 19 member states.</p>
                    <p>In September 2015 Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker announced proposals for the development of a European Pillar of Social Rights. The new Pillar was formally declared in November 2017, focusing on equal opportunities and support in accessing the labour market, equitable working conditions, and social protection and inclusion, primarily in the member states of the eurozone. Alongside the Pillar, a new Social Scoreboard was established to monitor the progress made by member states in achieving various social and employment objectives. The objectives of the European Pillar of Social Rights were made a priority and incorporated into the work of the European Semester, the EU’s yearly cycle of economic governance.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.140" usage="ewyb edio casee">
          The EU’s disability strategy focuses on: co-operation between the Commission and the member states; the full participation of people with disabilities; and ensuring disability issues are fully recognized in policy formulation (particularly with regard to employment). Under the EU Disability Strategy 2010–20, the Commission aimed to improve accessibility to goods and services for people with disabilities; to help disabled people to exercise their right to vote; to promote the European Platform Against Poverty
          
          ; to ensure that the ESF offered ongoing support to disability-related projects; to carry out data collection with the aim of improving opportunities for the employment of disabled people; to ensure inclusive education; to facilitate the mutual recognition of disability cards and related entitlements throughout Europe; and to promote the rights of people with disabilities through the EU’s external activities. The European Accessibility Act, which aims to improve the functionality of the internal market with respect to the provision of accessible goods and services, became law in 2019. In March 2021 the Commission published a new Strategy for the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 2021–30, in an effort to ensure that disabled people were able to participate fully and on an equal basis with non-disabled people throughout society; the European Accessibility Resource Centre (AccessibleEU) is a major initiative of the new strategy.
        </p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>