<int-org-sectref id="SL1112115" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112114" slsdocid="1103440" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.290" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                    <heading>Other European Countries</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.231">The members of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) concluded bilateral free trade agreements with the European Economic Community and the European Coal and Steel Community during the 1970s. On 1 January 1984 the last tariff barriers were eliminated, thus establishing full free trade for industrial products between the European Communities and EFTA members. Some EFTA members subsequently applied for membership of the EC: Austria in 1989, Sweden in 1991, and Finland, Switzerland and Norway in 1992. Greenland withdrew from the EU in 1985, and subsequent relations were based on a special agreement. Formal negotiations on the creation of a European Economic Area (EEA), a single market for goods, services, capital and labour among EC and EFTA members, began in June 1990, and were concluded in October 1991. The agreement was signed in May 1992. In a referendum in December, Swiss voters rejected ratification of the agreement; the remaining 18 countries signed an adjustment protocol in March 1993, allowing the EEA to be established without Switzerland (which was given observer status). The EEA entered into force on 1 January 1994.</p>
                    <p>Formal negoti­ations on the accession to the EU of Austria, Finland, Sweden and Norway were concluded in March 1994 and treaties of accession to the EU were signed by heads of government of the four countries in June. Accession to the EU was endorsed by the electorates of Austria, Finland and Sweden in June, October and November 1994, respectively. Norway’s accession, however, was rejected in a national referendum at the end of November. From 1994 Norway’s relations with the EU were based on full participation in the EEA as well as involvement (at non-signatory level) in the EU’s Schengen Agreement. Austria, Finland and Sweden became members of the EU on 1 January 1995. Liech­tenstein, which became a full member of EFTA in September 1991, joined the EEA on 1 May 1995.</p>
                    <p>In 1999 Switzerland signed seven bilateral free trade agreements with the EU, mainly relating to trade liberalization (known together as Bilateral I). The first EU-Switzerland summit meeting took place in Brussels in May 2004, after which nine sectoral agreements (Bilateral II) were signed by the two parties. The participation of Switzerland in the Schengen Agreement on border controls and the extension of the agreement on the free movement of persons to the 10 states that joined the EU in May 2004 were approved by Swiss voters in public referendums in June and September 2005. A protocol on these measures and on Bilateral II was signed in October 2004, entering into force in April 2006. In February 2014 voters narrowly approved proposals that the country should renegotiate its freedom of movement agreement with the EU (a request that was refused by the EU), and introduce quotas for immigrants. Switzerland duly failed to ratify an agreement extending free movement to Croatia, and in April announced that it would allow a limited number of Croatians to enter Switzerland by means of a new quota system. In June 2016 the Swiss legislature voted to terminate formally a long-dormant application by Switzerland—submitted in 1992—to accede to EU membership. In December 2016 Switzerland passed legislation to ensure that employment vacancies gave priority to Swiss-based job seekers, but did not introduce quotas for workers from EU member states. The Swiss Government also signed an agreement extending freedom of movement to Croatia from 1 January 2017. Negotiations between the EU and Switzerland took place over Switzerland’s future relationship with the Union. The EU sought Switzerland’s endorsement of a new framework agreement, to replace some 120 sectoral agreements hitherto in place, agreed when Swiss accession was still anticipated. A draft institutional framework agreement was announced in December 2018, providing for equivalence with EU law in key areas. Amid some popular opposition to requirements on freedom of movement, the Swiss Government came under pressure to organize a referendum on the issue. In a referendum held in Switzerland in September 2020, a majority of voters rejected ending the existing freedom of movement arrangements with the EU. Nevertheless, in May 2021 the Swiss Government failed to sign a new institutional framework agreement with the EU, and withdrew from the negotiations. In February 2022 the Swiss Government proposed to seek to improve bilateral relations with the EU by enhancing individual agreements rather than establishing an overarching mechanism; exploratory discussions have been held between both parties since March.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.25084">Iceland joined EFTA in 1970 and ratified the EEA in 1993 (although the extension of the single market legislation excluded agriculture and fisheries management, as in Norway and Liechtenstein). Iceland negotiated participation in the Schengen Agreement, which it implemented from March 2001 (although, as a signatory, it was not involved in decision making within the agreement). Amid an economic crisis in Iceland in 2008, in July 2009 the Icelandic Parliament voted in favour of making an application for membership of the EU. Accession negoti­ations with Iceland opened in July 2010. Public enthusiasm for membership subsequently lessened, however. In June 2013 Iceland suspended its negotiations on membership and in March 2015 the Government officially announced Iceland’s withdrawal from the accession process.</p>
                    <p>
          Following the UK’s official departure from the EU on 31 January 2020 (see 
          <i>The United Kingdom’s Decision to Leave the EU</i>
          ), a new EU delegation to the UK opened on 1 February, tasked with, 
          <i>inter alia,</i>
           monitoring the implementation of the negotiated withdrawal agreement between the two parties during the so-called transition period, due to expire at the end of 2020. An agreement on trade and co-operation between the EU and the UK was finally concluded on 24 December, provisionally coming into effect at the beginning of 2021; it formally entered into force on 1 May. In January the UK Government attracted controversy when it refused to award the EU’s diplomatic representation in the capital, London, full diplomatic status, a decision that was reversed in May. In March the Commission announced that it intended to launch legal action against the UK Government in response to its plans to extend unilaterally the waivers in place for businesses in Northern Ireland, which had allowed a limited, three-month, suspension of some of the trade rules pertaining to goods entering Northern Ireland from the rest of the UK. (Under EU-UK trading arrangements, Northern Ireland, although part of the UK, had to adhere to EU single market regulations for goods.) Although the legal action was suspended in mid-2021, tensions over the implementation of the Northern Ireland protocol governing trade relations between the EU and the UK continued. In June 2022 the UK Government announced plans to introduce new legislation to override areas of its agreement with the EU, by removing both checks on goods travelling into Northern Ireland (and not intended for export) and the European Court of Justice’s (ECJ) role in overseeing the implementation of the protocol; the EU declared the UK’s actions to be a violation of international law, and announced that it was to resume legal action. In February 2023 it was announced that an agreement in principle had been reached between the UK and the EU, known as the Windsor Framework, under which Northern Ireland would remain in the EU single market and the ECJ would retain final jurisdiction on EU law. The de facto border in the Irish Sea between Great Britain and Northern Ireland would be removed by the separation of goods arrivals destined for Northern Ireland (with minimal paperwork necessary) or for export to the Republic of Ireland. Notably, the Northern Ireland Assembly would have the power to request that the UK Government prevent changes to EU single market rules from applying to Northern Ireland under the `Stormont brake’ emergency mechanism. The UK rejoined the Horizon Europe (see 
          <i>Research and Innovation</i>
          ) programme in January 2024 as an associated country.
        </p>
                    <p-alternates default="EDIO" type="ALTERNATES">
                         <p usage="edio">In November 2008 the European Commission adopted a communication on the EU and the Arctic Region, which emphasized the adverse effects of climate change and technological activities in that region. In April 2016 the Commission and the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy adopted a new, integrated policy for the Arctic, to address three principal areas: climate change and environmental protection; sustainable development; and international co-operation. In October 2021 the European External Action Service published its new Arctic Policy.</p>
                         <p usage="ewyb">In April 2016 the Commission and the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy adopted a new, integrated policy for the Arctic, to address three principal areas, namely climate change and environmental protection; sustainable development; and international co-operation. An updated policy for the Arctic was published in 2021.</p>
                    </p-alternates>
                    <p id="IO.EU.123">The EU’s Northern Dimension programme covers the Baltic Sea, Arctic Sea and north-west Russian Federation regions. It aims to address the specific challenges of these areas and to encourage co-operation with external states. In November 2006 the leaders of the EU, Iceland, Norway and Russia endorsed a new Policy Framework Document and Northern Dimension Political Declaration, replacing the three-year action plans hitherto in place with a new common regional policy. Following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 the EU, Iceland and Norway agreed to suspend all activities involving Russia or Belarus (an observer member of the Northern Dimension).</p>
                    <p>The EU Baltic Sea region comprises Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Sweden. In March 2012 the Commission proposed three overall objectives for the Baltic Sea Region (EUSBSR): to save the sea; to connect the region; and to increase prosperity. The EUSBSR aims to provide a framework for improving environmental conditions in the region, facilitating transportation flows, and improving networks for energy and research and innovation, as well as aiding the development of cross-border competition. In December 2014 the Commission adopted a new programme for co-operation in the Baltic Sea region in 2014–20, focusing on innovation, natural resources, transport and macro­regional co-operation. A new EUSBSR action plan was published in March 2017, and an updated plan was published by the Commission in February 2021.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.232">
          A trade agreement with Andorra entered into force on 1 January 1991. A wide-ranging co-operation agreement with Andorra and an agreement on the taxation of savings income entered into force in July 2005, when similar agreements on the taxation of savings income also took effect in Liechtenstein, Monaco and San Marino. In February 2016 the EU and Andorra signed an agreement seeking to improve tax compliance among private savers. Negotiations on a co-operation and customs union agreement between the EC and San Marino were concluded in December 1991; it entered into force in May 2002. The euro became the sole currency in circulation in Andorra, Monaco, San Marino and the Vatican City at the beginning of 2002. In March 2014 the European Commission recommended that negotiations be initiated with Andorra, Monaco and San Marino on participation in the single market
          
           . Negotiations with Monaco were suspended in September 2023
          
          
           . In December the European Commission announced the successful conclusion of negotiations on an Association Agreement with San Marino and Andorra.
        </p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>