<int-org-sectref id="SL1112165" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112164" slsdocid="1103485" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02049.IO.TXT.21" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Selected Funding Programmes</heading>
                    <p>The Common Provisions Regulation (CPR) provides a legal framework for EU funds that are jointly managed by the European Commission and EU member states (rather than being directly managed by the Commission, or indirectly managed). During 2021–27 it covers eight funds: the Cohesion Fund, the European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund (EMFAF), the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), the European Social Fund Plus (ESF+), and the Just Transition Fund (JTF), as well as the Asylum, Migration and Integration Fund, the Border Management and Visa Instrument, and the Internal Security Fund. These funds account for around one-third of the EU’s budget over that period.</p>
                    <int-org-section id="WB02049.IO.TXT.22" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                         <heading>Cohesion Fund</heading>
                         <p id="WB02049.IO.TXT.106">The Treaty on European Union and its protocol on economic and social cohesion provided for the establishment of a Cohesion Fund, which began operating on 1 April 1993, with a mandate to subsidize projects in the fields of the environment and trans-European energy and commu­nications networks in member states with a per-head GNI of less than 90% of the Community average. Cohesion policy was simplified for 2021–27. The level of support and the national contribution are adjusted according to the level of development: less developed regions are defined as those with levels of gross domestic product (GDP) amounting to less than 75% of the EU average; transition regions are those with GDP of between 75% and 100% of the EU average; and more developed regions have GDP of more than 100% of the EU average. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, in April 2020 the European Commission introduced the Coronavirus Response Investment Initiative and the Coronavirus Response Investment Initiative Plus, which involved the redirection of cohesion funding to areas most in need. In late May this was supplemented with the proposal of REACT EU, which was to provide targeted crisis response and recovery measures by supplementing proposed cohesion funding for 2021–27. REACT EU was allocated some €47,500m. (in 2018 prices) in 2021–27 through the EU’s Next Generation EU recovery instrument. The new Multi-annual Financial Framework (MFF) provided for cohesion funding of some €42,556m. for 2021–27 (in 2018 prices).</p>
                    </int-org-section>
                    <int-org-section id="WB02049.IO.TXT.23.12" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF">
                         <heading>European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development—EAFRD</heading>
                         <p usage="ewyb edio casee">The EAFRD came into operation at the beginning of 2007. It replaced the Guidance Section of the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund (which previously financed the Common Agricultural Policy—CAP) and the rural development measures previously financed under the Guarantee section. It is responsible for the single financial contribution under the CAP to rural development programmes to develop agricultural competitiveness, ensure environmental sustainability and support balanced development among rural communities. Under the MFF for 2021–27 the EAFRD was to receive €85,350m., in 2018 prices, including €7,500m. under the EU’s COVID-19 recovery plan, Next Generation EU, to help to respond to issues introduced by the pandemic.</p>
                    </int-org-section>
                    <int-org-section id="WB02049.IO.TXT.23" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF">
                         <heading usage="">European Agricultural Guarantee Fund—EAGF</heading>
                         <p id="WB02049.IO.TXT.107">
            The EAGF was created in September 2005 to replace the Guarantee Section of the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund. It came into operation at the beginning of 2007 and was given responsibility for, 
            <i>inter alia</i>
            , the provision of direct payments to farmers under the CAP (currently a basic payment scheme, green direct payments for sustainable farming methods and payments for younger farmers), finance for the export of agricultural products to third countries, and intervention measures to regulate agricultural markets under the Common Organization for Agricultural Markets. Under the MFF for 2021–27, the EAGF was allocated funding of some €258,594m., in 2018 prices.
          </p>
                    </int-org-section>
                    <int-org-section id="WB02049.IO.TXT.229876" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                         <heading>European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund—EMFAF</heading>
                         <p>From 2014 the EMFF replaced the European Fisheries Fund, which was established in 1993 (having replaced the Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance, established in 1993). The EMFF was renewed for 2021–27 as the EMFAF, and aims to grant financial support to facilitate the implementation of the Common Fisheries Policy and to help support a transition to sustainable fishing, to facilitate sustainable aquaculture, to help maritime communities to diversify their economies and to stimulate employment. For 2021–27 €5,430m. was allocated to the EMFAF (in 2018 prices).</p>
                    </int-org-section>
                    <int-org-section id="WB02049.IO.TXT.24" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                         <heading>European Regional Development Fund—ERDF</heading>
                         <p id="WB02049.IO.TXT.108">Payments began in 1975. The Fund is intended to compensate for the unequal rate of development in different EU regions. It finances investment leading to the creation or maintenance of jobs, improvements in infra­structure, local development initiatives and the business activities of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in least favoured regions. The MFF for 2021–27 allocated some €200,360m. to the ERDF, in 2018 prices. Over that period investment is focused around five principal areas: providing support to SMEs, with improved digitization and digital connectivity; environmental sustainability; enhanced mobility; social inclusion (including inclusive employment and education, and access to skills and health care, as well as culture and environmentally aware tourism); and supporting local and sustainable urban development. </p>
                    </int-org-section>
                    <int-org-section id="WB02049.IO.TXT.10814258751" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                         <heading>European Social Fund Plus—ESF+</heading>
                         <p>The ESF+ was introduced for 2021–27, with funding of €88,000m. in 2018 prices. (The ESF—established in 1960—provided resources with the aim of combating long-term unemployment and facilitating the integration into the labour market of young people and the socially disadvantaged, and supported schemes to help workers to adapt to industrial changes.) The ESF+ was conceived as a cornerstone of the EU’s socioeconomic recovery from COVID-19, and includes the ESF, the Fund for European Aid to the most Deprived, the Youth Employment Initiative and the European Programme for Employment and Social Innovation.</p>
                    </int-org-section>
                    <int-org-section id="IO-EU.FUNDS.001" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF">
                         <heading>European Union Solidarity Fund—EUSF</heading>
                         <p>
            The EUSF was established in 2002 to support disaster response activities in member states. In 2002–early 2024 the EUSF utilized a total of over €8,600m. to respond to 110 disaster
            
             events in 24 member states and four accession states. Since April 2020, in the framework of EU efforts to fight the COVID-19 pandemic, the scope of the EUSF has been extended to cover major public health emergencies. For 2021–27 the EUSF forms part of a new Solidarity and Emergency Aid Reserve.
          </p>
                    </int-org-section>
                    <int-org-section id="IO-EU.FUNDS.2903201" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF">
                         <heading>Just Transition Fund</heading>
                         <p>
            The Just Transition Fund was proposed in 2020 as part of the environment-orientated European Green Deal Investment Plan (see 
            <i>Environment</i>
            ). Under the new MFF, the Just Transition Fund was allocated some €7,500m. in 2021–27, in 2018 prices, and some €10,000m. under the EU’s Next Generation EU recovery instrument. The Fund supports economic diversification in regions of member states that are expected to be negatively impacted by the transition towards climate neutrality.
          </p>
                    </int-org-section>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>