<int-org-sectref id="SL1112069" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112068" slsdocid="1103280" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.280" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Education, Training and Culture</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.118" usage="ewyb edio casee">The intergovernmental Bologna process was launched in 1999 with the aim of establishing a European Higher Education Area (EHEA), encompassing education networks and student exchanges. In March 2010 the Bologna process ministers responsible for higher education adopted the Budapest-Vienna Declaration, officially launching the EHEA. Meanwhile, in May 2009 the Council had adopted Education and Training 2020 (ET 2020), a strategic framework for European co-operation in education and training, which identified four principal objectives: to facilitate lifelong learning and mobility; to improve the quality of education and training; to promote equality, social cohesion and citizenship; and to help to develop creativity and innovation in education and training. The Brussels-based Education, Audiovisual and Culture Executive Agency (EACEA), founded in 2006, manages the Erasmus+ and the Creative Europe programmes (see below).</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.119" usage="ewyb edio casee">
          The postgraduate European University Institute (EUI) was founded in Florence, Italy, in 1972, with departments of history and civilization, economics, law, and political and social sciences. The EUI is also the depository for the historical archives of the EC institutions. An Academy of European Law was founded within the EUI in 1990, and in 1992 the Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies was established to develop interdisciplinary and comparative postdoctoral research. The Jean Monnet programme, which supports institutions and activities in the field of European integration, finances the establishment of Jean Monnet Chairs at universities throughout the world; the programme targets disciplines in which EU developments are an increasingly important part of the subject studied—e.g. European law and European economic and political integration. The establishment of a network of Jean Monnet Centres of Excellence was approved in 1998; the network was extended beyond Europe in 2001. As part of Horizon Europe (see 
          <i>Research and Innovation</i>
          , the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions programme (with a budget of €6,600m. in 2021–27) funds doctoral and post-doctoral education and training.
        </p>
                    <p>Erasmus educational exchanges were launched in 1987, to enable students throughout Europe to travel to other EU countries to study and work as part of their degree programme. From 2004 students and academics living outside the EU were able to apply for Erasmus Mundus Master Courses at EU universities. In November 2013 the European Parliament (EP) approved the Erasmus+ programme, to cover the period 2014–20. Erasmus+ merged seven previous programmes covering education, training, youth and sport, and focuses, in particular, on multilingualism, individual mobility, co-operation for innovation, and support for policy reform. Erasmus+ operates in 33 countries (the 27 EU member states, and six associated third countries: Iceland, Liechtenstein, North Macedonia, Norway, Serbia and Türkiye) and was renewed for 2021–27, with a budget of €24,574m. in current prices (plus an additional top-up of €1,700m. in 2018 prices). An educational information network, Eury­dice, which is co-ordinated by the EACEA, provides data on and analyses of European national education systems and policies. It has units in all Erasmus+ programme countries.</p>
                    <p>
          The European Training Foundation was established in Turin, Italy, in 1995; the Foundation aims (with a mandate revised in December 2008) to support developing and transition countries to develop human capital as part of the EU’s external relations policy, by, for example, reforming systems of education and training as well as the labour market. The European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training was also established in 1975, in Berlin, Germany (relocating to Thessaloníki, Greece, in 1995). The Europass programme was officially launched in February 2005 (and relaunched as part of the Skills Agenda, see 
          <i>Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion</i>
           in July 2020), and provides online tools to help users to find and apply for job and courses throughout the EU promoting occupational mobility, as well as mobility for learning purposes. The European qualifications framework (EQF) identifies eight reference levels for qualifications, and serves as a translation tool to find equivalence between the different types of national qualification, in order further to promote mobility and lifelong learning. The EQF was formally established in 2008, and revised in 2017. Since 2012 every new qualification issued in the EU has a reference to the appropriate EQF level.
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.126" usage="ewyb edio casee">
          In November 2007 the Council endorsed the first European strategy for culture policy. In November 2008 the Europeana project was launched, funded by the European Commission, with the aim of creating an online digital library to make Europe’s cultural heritage accessible to the public (www.europeana.eu). In November 2011 the European Commission proposed a new programme, Creative Europe, to supersede the Culture and MEDIA (see 
          <i>Communications, Content, Technology and the Digital Single Market</i>
          ) programmes; the programme entered into operation on 1 January 2014, with a budget of some €1,460m. for 2014–20. Creative Europe 
          
          was renewed for 2021–27, with a budget of €1,842m. in current prices.
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.127" usage="ewyb edio casee">The European City of Culture initiative was launched in 1985 (and renamed the European Capital of Culture initiative in 1999). Member states nominate one or more cities, in turn, according to an agreed chronological order. The capitals of culture are then formally selected by the Council on the recommendation of the Commission, taking into account the views of a selection panel. Since 2009 there have been two or three annual capitals of culture from member states, including one from the post-May 2004 contingent, and from 2021 candidate countries, potential candidate countries and European Free Trade Association countries were also eligible to hold the title of capital of culture. The capitals of culture for 2024 are Bad Ischl (Austria), Bodø (Norway) and Tartu (Estonia), and for 2025 are Chemnitz (Germany) and Nova Gorica (Slovenia). The European Prize for Literature was launched by the European Commission in 2009. Since 2013 the European Heritage Label has been granted annually to sites of symbolic importance to European history.</p>
                    <p>
          In June 2016 the European Commission and the EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy announced a new Strategy for International Cultural Relations, which seeks to foster cultural co-operation with countries in order to promote freedom of expression, mutual understanding and respect for the EU’s fundamental values. The new strategy was adopted in line with the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and in the belief that cultural engagement can help in developing responses to international challenges, such as integrating refugees, preventing Islamist radicalization and preserving global cultural heritage. Intercultural dialogue was to be promoted, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , by means of co-operation between cultural institutions; cultural peacebuilding events; and exchanges of people.
        </p>
                    <p>The European Solidarity Corps (ESC) was announced in September 2016 as an initiative to offer opportunities for young adults, aged between 18 and 30 years, to take part in employment or volunteer work of benefit to communities throughout Europe. The initial phase of the initiative was launched in December, with phase 2 in 2018–20 and phase 3, with a budget of €1,010m. (at current prices), in 2021–27.</p>
                    <p>
          In November 2017 the Commission presented proposals to establish a European Education Area (EEA) by 2025, and to encourage an increased focus on EU culture. The planned EEA was to be based on: mobility for all, building on the success of initiatives such as Erasmus+ (with the aim of increasing participation levels twofold by 2025), together with the introduction from 2019 of a new EU student card to facilitate storage of and access to individuals’ academic data; the mutual recognition of academic diplomas and school leaving certificates, together with a new, so-called Sorbonne process, which would build on the Bologna process; improving language skills, with a new target for school-leavers to have a working knowledge of two languages in addition to their first language by 2025; the promotion of learning throughout life, in order to increase the proportion of people engaging in lifelong learning to a target of 25% by 2025; the introduction of a new Digital Education Action Plan, encouraging innovative, digital training; supporting teachers, through, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , increasing participation in EU initiatives such as Erasmus+ and the eTwinning online platform (which, since 2005, encourage collaboration and co-operation between schools throughout the Union); creating a network of universities to facilitate cross-border co-operation and competition, as well as establishing a School of European and Transnational Governance in Florence; investing in education by supporting structural reforms to develop policy, by utilizing EU funding and investment and by setting a target for member states to invest 5% of gross domestic product in education; preserving European cultural heritage and identity through the development of a New European Agenda for Culture; and increasing the European focus of Euronews, established in 1993 by European public broadcasters. As part of the New European Agenda for Culture, in November 2018 a Work Plan for Culture in 2019–22 was adopted. A Council Resolution on a new Work Plan for Culture 2023–26 was approved in November 2022, comprising four areas: empowering the cultural and creative sectors; enhancing cultural participation in society; `culture for the planet’; and enhancing cultural partnerships in EU external relations. In September 2020 the Commission published a new communication that established guidelines for achieving the EEA by the scheduled completion date of 2025.
        </p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>