<int-org-sectref id="SL1112035" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112034" slsdocid="1103263" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.275.2" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.59" usage="ewyb edio casee">The Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) came into force in July 1952, and by the end of 1954 nearly all barriers to trade in coal, coke, steel, pig iron and scrap iron had been removed. The ECSC treaty expired in July 2002, and the provisions of the ECSC treaty were incorporated in the European Economic Community treaty, on the grounds that it was no longer appropriate to treat the coal and steel sectors separately.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.66" usage="ewyb edio casee">In 1990 the European Council adopted two directives with the aim of removing the tax obstacles encountered by companies operating across borders: the Merger Directive was designed to reduce tax measures that could hamper business reorganization and the Parent-Subsidiary Directive abolished double taxation of profit distributed between parent companies in one member state and their subsidiaries in others. In October 2001 the European Council adopted two legislative instruments enabling companies to form a public European Company (Societas Europaea—SE), giving companies operating in more than one member state the option of establishing themselves as single companies, thereby able to function throughout the EU under one set of rules and through a unified management system. In July 2003 the Council adopted similar legislation enabling co-operatives to form a European Co-operative Society (Societas Cooperativa Europaea—SCE). Reform of the EC Merger Regulation entered into effect in May 2004. A directive aimed at facilitating cross-border mergers of limited liability companies was adopted by the European Parliament (EP) and the Council in October 2005.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">In November 2005 the Commission launched a new policy framework for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). A Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme (CIP), targeted primarily at SMEs, was implemented during 2007–13. In June 2008 the Commission adopted the Small Business Act for Europe (SBA) to streamline bureaucratic procedures for SMEs and promote entrepreneurship. By 2010 SMEs accounted for 99% of all EU enterprises. A programme for the Competitiveness of Enterprises and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (COSME), was implemented in 2014–20, which from 2021 became part of a new Single Market Programme, which was to support the implementation and monitoring of EU legislation in relation to the internal market for goods and services, market surveillance, standardization, competition and financial services, while supporting the European recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. It was also to provide advisory services to SMEs, in particular through the Enterprise Europe Network (which was launched in 2008 to provide information to businesses).</p>
                    <p>
          The Commission published an action plan for a competitive and sustainable steel industry in mid-2013. A Commission communication in January 2014 entitled `For a European Industrial Renaissance’, established the Commission’s industrial policy objectives and emphasized the fundamental role of industry in stimulating both growth and employment, and the full potential of the single market. The Commission recognized, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , that with relatively scarce natural resources and strong commitments to both social and environmental standards, EU member states struggled to compete globally in terms of low prices; however, it recommended that the EU’s industrial sector be stimulated through a focus on innovation, new technologies and skills. In April 2016 the Commission adopted a communication on `Digitising European Industry’ as part of the strategy for the creation of a Digital Single Market. The Start-up and Scale-up Initiative, proposed by the Commission in November, sought to encourage the creation of industrial start-ups in the EU through simplified taxation measures, improved access to financing and amendments to legislation on insolvency, to facilitate restructuring. In September 2017 the Commission published proposals for a renewed industrial policy strategy, entitled `Investing in a Smart, Innovative and Sustainable Industry’. A so-called Industry 2030 High Level Industrial Roundtable of experts was set up by the Commission in December 2017 in order to provide independent advice on EU industrial policy; in mid-2019 the grouping provided its final report, setting out recommendations in `A Vision for Industry until 2030’. In March 2020 the Commission proposed a new `industrial strategy for a globally competitive, green and digital Europe’, as part of the newly conceived European Green Deal (see 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="WB02048.IO.TXT.283">
                              <i>Energy, Environment and Climate</i>
                         </xr>
          ). In February 2023 the Commission put forward the Green Deal Industrial Plan, which would aim to increase the production capacity of key green technologies in the EU, with a focus on four areas: a simplified regulatory environment (including a Net-Zero Industry Act, proposed in March, to set goals for `clean technology’ by 2030
          
          ; provisional agreement was reached on the Act in February 2024); access to funding; skills development; and strong and resilient supply chains.
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.00456" usage="ewyb edio casee">The European Patent Convention (EPC) was signed in 1973 and entered into effect in 1977. A revised EPC entered into force in December 2007. In June 1997 the Commission pub­lished proposals to simplify the European patent system through the introduction of a unitary Community patent (renamed the EU patent after the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty in December 2009), to remove the need to file patent applications with individual member states. In December 2009 European Council agreed a draft regulation on the EU patent, in accordance with which it was envisaged that the EU would accede to the EPC (which would require further revision to the Convention), and the European Patent Office (based in Munich, Germany) would grant EU patents with unitary effect throughout the territory of the EU. In December 2012 the EP approved the so-called patent package, comprising two draft regulations, on increased co-operation to facilitate unitary patent protection and associated translation arrangements, and an agreement on the establishment of a Unified Patent Court, which prepared the way for the introduction of a European patent with unitary effect. The agreement establishing the Unitary Patent Convention (UPC) was signed in February 2013 and the new Unitary Patent System and the Unified Patent Court became operational in June 2023. Unitary Patents were, initially, to cover all member states that had already ratified the UPC agreement (currently 17 member states have done so: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia and Sweden).</p>
                    
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.662435" usage="ewyb edio casee">An Office for Harmonization in the Internal Market, based in Alicante, Spain, was established in December 1993. It became the European Union Intellectual Property Office in 2016 and is responsible for the registration of Union trademarks and for ensuring that these receive uniform protection throughout the EU.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.65" usage="ewyb edio casee">The liberalization of public procurement has played an important role in the establishment of the single market. From January 1993 the liberalization of procurement was extended to include public utilities in the previously excluded sectors of energy, transport, drinking water and telecommunications. In 2002 the EP adopted a regulation aimed at simplifying the rules on procurement of contract notices; a regulation updating the system for classifying public procurement was adopted in November 2007. The European Public Procurement Network was established in January 2003, comprising all EU member states, EU candidate countries, European Economic Area (EEA) members, Switzerland and other European countries, to strengthen the application of public procurement rules through a mutual exchange of experience. Reforms to the EU’s public procurement directives were adopted in 2004 in an effort to improve transparency and efficiency. In April 2012 the Commission adopted a communication outlining a strategy for a full transition to e-procurement (procurement by electronic means of communication) throughout the EU, gradually from April 2016. The Commission adopted a new public procurement strategy in October 2017, which identified six strategic policy objectives focusing on: increased uptake of innovative, environmentally sound and social procurement; good practice among public procurement; increased access to markets; improving the transparency and integrity of data; digitization; and greater co-operation. In April 2020 the Commission published new guidance to help buyers make use of flexibility in the EU’s public procurement framework to ensure that equipment required in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic could be made readily available, for example by accelerating the public procurement process.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.70" usage="ewyb edio">
          In addition to the Enterprise Europe Network, the EU’s other information services for business include the Community Research and Development Information Service (CORDIS, see 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="WB02048.IO.TXT.273">
                              <i>Research and Innovation</i>
                         </xr>
          ) and the Your Europe portal (europa.eu/youreurope/business/index_en.htm), which provides practical information on doing business in Europe. In addition, more than 106 certified and 43 associate Business and Innovation Centres operate in the EU countries and outside the EU, with a mission to promote entrepreneurship and the creation of innovative businesses, and to assist existing companies to enhance their prospects through innovation.
        </p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>