<int-org-sectref id="SL1112140" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112139" slsdocid="1103450" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.293" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio fea">
                    <heading>Far East and Australasia</heading>
                    
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.250">
          Relations between the EU and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="ASEAN.IO">(ASEAN)</xr>
           were based on a Co-operation Agreement of 1980. In May 1995 ASEAN and EU senior officials endorsed an initiative to convene an Asia-Europe meeting of heads of government (ASEM), which usually takes place every two years. The first ASEM summit was held in March 1996 in Bangkok, Thailand. In March 2007, at an EU-ASEAN ministerial meeting held in Nuremberg, Germany, ASEAN and the EU made the Nuremberg Declaration on an EU-ASEAN Enhanced Partnership. In April 2012 the Bandar Seri Begawan Plan of Action was adopted by both sides, with the objective of strengthening the Enhanced Partnership in 2013–17. In July 2012 the EU acceded to the ASEAN Treaty of Amity and Co-operation. In July 2014 the EU and ASEAN agreed to strengthen co-operation through the establishment of a strategic partnership, focusing on connectivity; maritime security; and development co-operation. In July 2016 the 11th ASEM was held in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia, and addressed the theme `20 Years of ASEM: Partnership for the Future through Connectivity’. An ASEAN-EU Plan of Action for 2018–22 was adopted in August 2017. The 12th ASEM summit took place in Brussels in October 2018; efforts were under way to enhance connectivity between the two regions, by means of investment in infrastructure, exchange programmes, trade and digital projects. In December 2020 engagement between the EU and ASEAN was formally elevated to the status of a `strategic partnership’ (rather than the previous `dialogue’). In June 2021 the EU and ASEAN concluded negotiations on an ASEAN-EU Comprehensive Air Transport Agreement, the first `bloc-to-bloc’ aviation accord, which was expected to improve air transport connections between the two regions. The 13th ASEM summit was held via video conference from Phnom Penh, Cambodia, in November 2021, with the theme of `strengthening multilateralism for shared growth’. Discussions focused on the post-pandemic socioeconomic recovery, environmental issues and strengthening co-operation in foreign and security policy.
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.253">A trade agreement was signed with the People’s Republic of China in 1978 and renewed in May 1985. In June 1989, following the violent repression of the Chinese pro-democracy movement by the Chinese Government, the EC imposed economic sanctions and an embargo on arms sales to that country. In October 1990 it was decided that relations with China should be progressively normal­ized. The EU has supported China’s increased involvement in the international community and, in par­ticular, supported its application for membership of the World Trade Organization (WTO). The first EU-China meeting of heads of government was convened in April 1998. A bilateral trade agreement between the EU and China was concluded in May 2000, removing a major barrier to China’s accession to the WTO; this was approved in November 2001. In 2003 an EU-China comprehensive strategic partnership was established. At a summit meeting with China, held in Beijing in November 2013, the EU-China 2020 Strategic Agenda for Co-operation was adopted. Talks were initiated in 2014 with the aim of concluding a comprehensive EU-China Investment Agreement. A new EU-China Connectivity Platform was created in 2015, to facilitate co-operation in infrastructure. In June 2016 the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the European Commission adopted a new five-year strategy for the EU’s relationship with China, which was updated in March 2019. In response to the emergence of COVID-19 in China in late 2019, the EU co-ordinated the provision of personal protective equipment and medical supplies to China; China reciprocated when the virus spread throughout Europe during the first half of 2020. In December 2020 the EU and China adopted a new 2020 Strategic Agenda for Cooperation, and negotiations were concluded on the proposed EU-China Investment Agreement, which was due to come into force following ratification by both sides. However, in March 2021, amid claims that the human rights of Uighur Muslims in China were being abused, EU Ministers of Foreign Affairs agreed to impose travel bans and asset freezes on four individuals, in what were the first EU sanctions against China since 1989. In May 2021 the European Parliament (EP) voted to suspend the ratification of the agreement with China, after China imposed retaliatory sanctions on several EU officials. In September the EP adopted a report identifying areas of focus for a new EU strategy of engagement with China, including co-operation on common global challenges (including future pandemics and an independent investigation into the origin of COVID-19, addressing violations of human rights and combating disinformation). An EU-China summit took place via video link at the beginning of April 2022. The EU urged China (which has a close relationship with the Russian Federation) to support efforts to end the conflict in Ukraine, following Russia’s invasion of that country on 24 February.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.254">In September 1997 the EU joined the Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization, an initiative founded in 1995 to increase nuclear safety and reduce the risk of nuclear proliferation from the energy programme of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North Korea). A framework agreement on trade and co-operation between the EU and the Republic of Korea (South Korea) entered into force in April 2001. In May 2007 the EU and South Korea commenced negotiations towards the adoption of a free trade agreement. The deal, which provided for the elimination of almost all duties in the agricultural and industrial sectors, was signed at an EU-South Korea summit meeting held in Brussels in October 2010 and entered into force in July 2011; it was formally ratified in December 2015. Meanwhile, in May 2010 the EU and South Korea signed a new framework agreement on bilateral relations, which entered into force in June 2014. At a summit meeting in October 2010 the EU and South Korea also agreed further to strengthen their relationship, by forming a strategic partnership. A bilateral agreement on South Korea’s participation in EU crisis management operations entered into effect in December 2016, supplementing the strategic partnership.</p>
                    <p>In September 1999, for the first time, ministerial-level discussions took place between the EU and North Korea at the UN General Assembly. In May 2001 the EU announced that it was to establish diplomatic relations with North Korea to facilitate efforts in support of reconciliation in the Korean Peninsula and, in particular, in support of economic reform and the easing of the acute food and health problems in North Korea. However, the implementation of a Country Strategy Paper, adopted in March 2002, was suspended. In October the EU expressed its deep concern after North Korea admitted that it had conducted a clandestine nuclear weapons programme, in serious breach of the country’s international non-proliferation commitments. In response to North Korea’s announcement in October 2006 that it had conducted a nuclear test, the EU condemned the action and urged North Korea to abandon its nuclear programme. In April 2009 the EU strongly condemned North Korea for launching a rocket in contravention of UN Security Council resolutions. In December 2010 the Council reinforced sanctions in place against a number of individuals and entities in North Korea. Sanctions were subsequently strengthened between 2013 and 2018, and remain in place. The EU has implemented a policy of Critical Engagement in its relations with North Korea, combining the imposition of sanctions with efforts to remain open to dialogue in pursuit of full denuclearization.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.255">In April 2013 a Partnership and Co-operation Agreement (PCA) was signed with Mongolia; it entered into force in November 2017. A co-operation accord with Viet Nam entered into force in June 1996. In October 2004 the EU and Viet Nam concluded a bilateral agreement on market access in preparation for Viet Nam’s accession to the WTO, which took place in January 2007. In June 2012 a PCA was signed, and it entered into force in 2016. At the end of June 2019 a free trade agreement and an investment protection agreement were signed in Hanoi, Viet Nam. The free trade agreement entered into force in August 2020. A PCA between the EU and Singapore was initialled in October 2013. An EU-Singapore free trade agreement and investment protection agreement were signed in October 2018; the free trade agreement entered into force in November 2019. In December 2022 the EU and Singapore concluded negotiations on a new EU-Singapore Digital Partnership, to strengthen bilateral digital trade.</p>
                    <p>
          Negotiations on a PCA with Thailand resumed in mid-2021, having been suspended in 2014; negotiations concluded in September 2022 and the PCA was signed in December. A PCA with Malaysia was signed on the same day, which would, once it entered into force, replace the Commission-ASEAN co-operation agreement signed in 1980.
          
                    </p>
                    <p>Non-preferential co-operation agreements were signed with Lao PDR and Cambodia in April 1997. The agreement with Lao PDR entered into force in December; the agreement with Cambodia was postponed owing to adverse political developments, and entered into force in November 1999. In February 2020 the EU announced that it was partially to suspend trade preferences for Cambodia, in response to the deteriorating human rights situation there. In September 1999 the EU briefly imposed an arms embargo against Indonesia, which was at that time refusing to permit the deployment of an international peacekeeping force in East Timor (now Timor-Leste). In April 2005 the EU extended preferential trade conditions to Indonesia. In November 2009 an EU-Indonesia PCA was signed; it entered into force in May 2014. A Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement with Indonesia was concluded in 2018; it entered into force in November 2021.</p>
                    <p>In October 1996 the EU imposed strict limits on entry visas for officials from Myanmar, owing to its refusal to allow the Commission to send a mission to the country to investigate allegations of forced labour. The EU successively extended its ban on arms exports to Myanmar and its prohibition on the issuing of visas. Sanctions were extended in 2003–04. In August 2009 sanctions were extended to the Myanmar judiciary. In September 2010 the European Commission adopted a proposal that Myanmar’s special trade privileges under the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP), which had been revoked in 1997, should be restored; this took effect in July 2013. Meanwhile, in April EU ministers responsible for foreign affairs had agreed formally to remove all sanctions (with the exception of those relating to military issues). However, in June 2018 the Council imposed sanctions against seven senior members of the military and security forces, who were accused of perpetrating atrocities against the Rohingya Muslim population. In March 2020 the EU announced funding of €31m. to help those affected by the Rohingya crisis in both Myanmar and Bangladesh. In February 2021 the EU condemned the military coup in Myanmar.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.257">
          In July 1991 the heads of government of Japan and of the EC signed a joint declaration on closer economic and political co-operation. In January 1998 an EU-Japan summit meeting was held; subsequent summits have aimed to strengthen dialogue. Negotiations on a EU-Japan Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) were initiated in March 2013. In July 2018 the two sides signed a Strategic Partnership Agreement and the EPA. Notably, Japanese tariffs on EU food products were to be reduced, as were EU tariffs on imports of Japanese vehicles, and associated parts; agreement on data protection was also reached. The EPA entered into effect on 1 February 2019, and the Strategic Partnership Agreement applied provisionally from the same date. In September Japan signed an infrastructure agreement with the EU, as part of the EU’s plans to increase connectivity (in the context of digital, energy and transport networks) between EU member states and Asia. At a summit meeting, which took place online in July 2021, the two sides stated, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , their joint commitment to combating the COVID-19 pandemic. At the 28th EU-Japan summit, which took place in Tokyo, Japan in May 2022, both sides, 
          <i>inter alia, </i>
           condemned Russia’s aggression against Ukriane; launched an EU-Japan Digital Partnership; and undertook to enhance co-operation in the Indo-Pacific region. At the 29th summit, held in Brussels in July 2023, both sides reaffirmed their `ever closer strategic partnership’ and agreed to work together to promote peace and security; ensure economic security; work on climate change and sustainable development; and enhance health security.
        </p>
                    <p-alternates default="EDIO" type="ALTERNATES">
                         <p usage="edio fea">
            Regular consultations are held with Australia at ministerial and senior official level. In January 1996 the Commission proposed a framework agreement to formalize the EU’s trade and political relationship with that country, but negotiations were suspended owing to Australian objections to the human rights clause contained in all EU international agreements. A joint declaration was signed in mid-1997, committing both sides to greater political, cultural and economic co-operation. In April 2003 EU-Australia ministerial consultations convened in Melbourne, Australia, adopted a five-year Agenda for Co-operation. In October 2008 ministers responsible for foreign affairs from the EU and Australia, meeting in Paris, France, adopted a Partnership Framework, outlining future co-operation in the areas of foreign policy and security issues; trade; relations with Asia and the Pacific; environment; and science, technology and education; the Partnership Framework was updated in October 2009. In April 2015 negotiations were concluded on an EU-Australia Framework Agreement, which was signed in August 2017. In mid-2018 the EU and Australia launched negotiations towards a comprehensive trade agreement
            
             . The EU multi-annual programme for the Pacific Island countries (Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu) for the period 2021–27 focuses on three priority areas: climate change and the environment; economic development, including the blue economy; and human rights and human development.
          </p>
                         <p usage="ewyb">Regular consultations are held with Australia at ministerial and senior official level. In October 2008 ministers responsible for foreign affairs from the EU and Australia, meeting in Paris, France, adopted a Partnership Framework, outlining future co-operation in the areas of foreign policy and security issues; trade; relations with Asia and the Pacific; environment; and science, technology and education. The Partnership Framework was updated in October 2009. In April 2015 negotiations were concluded on an EU-Australia Framework Agreement, which was signed in August 2017. In mid-2018 the EU and Australia launched negotiations with the aim of concluding a comprehensive trade agreement.</p>
                    </p-alternates>
                    <p>Mutual recognition agreements were signed with Australia and New Zealand in 1999, with the objective of facilitating bilateral trade in industrial products. In March 2004 a European Commission Delegation was inaugurated in Wellington, New Zealand. In September 2007 a joint declaration on relations and co-operation was adopted by the EU and New Zealand, replacing the 1999 joint declaration and 2004 action plan. In July 2014 it was announced that talks had been concluded on an EU-New Zealand Partnership Agreement on Relations and Co-operation, which was signed in October 2016. In mid-2018 talks were initiated with New Zealand on a free trade agreement; a new agreement was signed in July 2023, following the conclusion of negotiations in June 2022.</p>
                    
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>