<int-org-sectref id="SL1112162" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112161" slsdocid="1103475" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02049.IO.TXT.19" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Budget</heading>
                    <p id="WB02049.IO.TXT.100" usage="ewyb edio casee">The EU budget, which funds EU policies and finances all the EU institutions, is limited by agreement of all the member states. The European Commission puts forward spending proposals, which have to be approved by the European Parliament (EP) and the Council. The EP signs the agreed budget into law. Revenue for the budget comes from `own resources’, largely comprising customs duties, sugar levies, payments based on value-added tax (VAT) and contributions from the member states based on their gross national income (GNI). Member states collect own resources on the EU’s behalf. The Commission is accountable each year to the EP for its use of EU funds. External audits are carried out by the European Court of Auditors. To combat fraud, the European Anti-Fraud Office was established in June 1999.</p>
                    <p id="WB02049.IO.TXT.101" usage="ewyb edio casee">The general budget contains the expenditure of the main EU institutions, of which Commission expenditure (covering administrative costs and expendi­ture on operations) forms the largest proportion. Expenditure is divided into two categories: commitment appropriations (commitments), which correspond to the cost of legally binding pledges pertaining to a particular financial year, and payment appropriations (payments), which relate to the actual expenditure made, as a result of legal commitments for the current year, as well as, potentially, previous years. Where expenditure must be made in the same year, for example, in the case of financial support to the agricultural sector, commitments and payments will be identical.</p>
                    <p>
          The budgetary process is aided by the establishment of Financial Perspectives, which are spending plans covering a number of years, thus guaranteeing the security of long-term EU projects and activities. Although the Financial Perspective limits expenditure in each policy area for each of the years covered, a more detailed annual budget still has to be agreed each year. The Commission presents the preliminary draft annual budget in late April or early May of the preceding year and the adopted budget is published in Febru
          
          ary of the relevant year. If the budget has not been adopted by the beginning of the financial year, monthly expenditure may amount to one-12th of the appropriations adopted for the previous year's budget. The Commission may (even late in the year during which the budget is being executed) revise estimates of revenue and expenditure, by presenting supplementary and/or amending budgets.
        </p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">In May 2006 a new financial framework for the enlarged EU was formally adopted, when the EP, the Council and the Commission signed an interinstitutional agreement on budgetary discipline and sound financial management, which entered into force in January 2007.</p>
                    <p>The new Multi-annual Financial Framework (MFF) for 2021–27 was negotiated by EU leaders in 2020, with negotiations complicated by the need to finance recovery efforts amid the COVID-19 pandemic; an agreement was reached on 21 July 2020, which provided for funding of €1,074,000m. during 2021–27 (at 2018 prices). Political agreement on the MFF for 2021–27 was reached between the Parliament and the Council on 10 November 2020, and it was adopted in mid-December. From January 2021 a new category of budgetary contribution was introduced to the budget for 2021–27, based on non-recycled waste from plastic packaging. Under the 2024 budget, authorized expenditure appropriations were set at €189,385.4m. in commitments and €142,630.3m. in payments.</p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>