<int-org-sectref id="SL1112027" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112026" slsdocid="1103261" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.274" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Energy, Environment and Climate</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.49" usage="ewyb edio casee">
          The treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) came into force on 1 January 1958. This was designed to encourage the growth of the nuclear energy industry in the Community by conducting research, providing access to information, supplying nuclear fuels, building reactors and establishing common laws and procedures. A common market for nuclear materials was introduced in 1959 and there is a common insurance scheme against nuclear risks. In 1977 the Commission began granting loans on behalf of Euratom to finance investment in nuclear power stations and the enrichment of fissile materials. An agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) entered into force in the same year, to facilitate co-operation in research on nuclear safeguards and controls. The EU’s Joint Research Centre (JRC, see 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="WB02048.IO.TXT.273">
                              <i>Research and Innovation</i>
                         </xr>
          ) conducts research on nuclear safety and the management of radioactive waste.
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.50" usage="ewyb edio casee">The Joint European Torus (JET), an experimental thermonuclear machine designed to pioneer new processes of nuclear fusion, based in Culham, UK and largely funded by Euratom, was in operation between 1984 and December 2023. JET was to be decommissioned by 2040; fusion experiments were to continue under the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER), in Cadarache, France, which was expected to become operational in late 2025. Work carried out as part of the JET project contributed significantly to preparations for ITER (a joint endeavour between the EU, Switzerland, the UK, the People’s Republic of China, India, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and the USA). The European Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development of Fusion Energy (now known as Fusion for Energy) was established in March 2007 to manage the EU’s contribution to ITER, and in November overall responsibility for ITER was formally assumed by the newly established ITER International Fusion Energy Organization. In October 2014 the Commission officially launched the European Consortium for the Development of Fusion Energy (EUROfusion), superseding the European Fusion Development Agreement and incorporating 29 bilateral association agreements between the Commission and research institutions.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.52" usage="ewyb edio">Legislation on the completion of the internal energy market, adopted in 1990, aimed to encourage the sale of electricity and gas across national borders by opening national networks to foreign supplies, obliging suppliers to publish their prices and co-ordinating investment in energy. In 2000 European electricity and gas energy regulators established the Council of European Energy Regulators, a not-for-profit association that promotes voluntary co-operation. In 2003 the Second Energy Package was adopted (the First Energy Package directives were adopted in, respectively, 1996 and 1998), providing for markets to be opened up by July 2004 for non-domestic users and by July 2007 for domestic users. The European Regulators Group for electricity and gas (ERGEG) was established in November 2003 to act as an advisory group of independent national regulatory authorities to assist the Commission in consolidating the internal energy markets. </p>
                    <p>In June 2009 the Council adopted the Third Energy Package. This included regulations on conditions for access to natural gas transmission networks and the network for cross-border exchanges in electricity, and provided for the ERGEG to be superseded by the Slovenia-based Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER), which became operational in 2011. The Third Energy Package aimed to separate energy supply and production from network operations; to ensure fair competition both within the EU and with respect to third countries; to strengthen the national energy regulators; and to create European Networks of Transmission Oper­ators for both electricity (ENTSO-E) and gas (ENTSO-G). In July 2009 the ENTSO-E took over all the operational tasks of the hitherto six European Transmission System Operators associations. The ENTSO-G was established in December, comprising 33 Transmission System Operators from 22 European countries.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.9865" usage="edio">In October 2005 the EU signed a treaty establishing an Energy Community, which entered into force in July 2006, and extended the EU’s internal energy market to South-Eastern Europe and further afield (non-EU member states that are contracting parties to the treaty include Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Kosovo, Moldova, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Serbia and Ukraine). Armenia, Norway and Turkey (now Türkiye) were admitted as observers. The treaty, which aimed to facilitate the creation of an integrated pan-European market for electricity and gas, required the signatories to adopt EU energy regulations.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.56" usage="ewyb edio casee">
          The EU promoted trans-European networks (TENs, see also 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="WB02048.IO.TXT.278">
                              <i>Transport</i>
                         </xr>
          ), with the aim of developing European energy, telecommunications and transport through the interconnection and opening up of national networks. Revised guidelines for the TEN-Energy (TEN-E) programme were adopted by the Council in July 2006, and a revised TEN-E regulation entered into force in June 2022, which established new rules on cross-border energy infrastructure; aimed to further develop the EU offshore strategy and encourage co-operation between member states in the generation of offshore renewable energy; and supported hydrogen transport networks. In November 2013 the European Parliament (EP) approved the EU’s new infrastructure policy, with the introduction of the new Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) for the fields of transport, energy and telecommunications. The CEF was allocated funds for energy of €5,180m. for 2021–27 (in 2018 prices).
        </p>
                    <p>Environmental action by the EU was initiated in 1972. The Maastricht Treaty, which entered into force in November 1993, gave environmental action policy status, and the Treaty of Amsterdam identified sustainable development as one of the overall aims of the EC. In June 1998 European heads of state and of government launched the Cardiff Process, requiring the integration of environmental considerations into all EU policies. The European Environment Agency located in Copenhagen, Denmark, became operational in No­vember 1994, and monitors environmental issues, provides targeted information to policymakers and the public and disseminates comparable environmental data. The agency is open to non-EU countries and was the first EU body to have members from the accession states.</p>
                    <p>
          The online European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register (E-PRTR) provides data for EU member states, as well as Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, Serbia and Switzerland, on pollutants and industrial sectors, including industrial activities. The European Parliament (EP) approved legislation in April 2004, which sought to make firms that caused pollution liable for the cost of repairing the damage caused to natural habitats, water resources and wildlife. In January 2011 a new Industrial Emissions Directive entered into force, intended, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , to tighten emissions limits in certain industrial sectors, to introduce minimum standards for environmental inspections of industrial installations and to extend the scope of legislation to cover other polluting activities, such as medium-sized combustion plants. In April 2022 the Commission proposed transforming the E-PRTR into an EU Industrial Emissions Portal as part of proposals to revise the Industrial Emissions Directive. 
        </p>
                    
                    <p>
          The EU has approved numerous international instruments relating to the environment. In June 2000 the Commission launched the European Climate Change Programme (ECCP), which aimed to identify and develop a strategy needed to meet commitments under the Kyoto Protocol, and to incorporate climate change concerns into various EU policies. ECCP II was launched in October 2005, with the aim of reviewing the progress of individual member states towards achieving their own targets on reducing emissions, and developing a framework for EU climate change policy beyond the expiry of the Kyoto Protocol. Meanwhile, in April 2009 the Council adopted new climate change legislation, committing EU member states to reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 20% in 2013–20, compared with emissions levels in 1990. The Council also agreed to increase the use of renewable energy sources to 20% by 2020, and to increase energy efficiency by 20% by the same date. In March 2015 the EU submitted its planned contribution to a new climate action plan to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). In December representatives of 195 countries met in Paris, France, for the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP) of the UNFCCC, where a universal, legally binding climate agreement was adopted for the first time. The so-called Paris Agreement entered into force in November 2016, incorporating pledges to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, increase investment in low carbon infrastructure and finance climate adaptation and mitigation in developing countries, in order to limit the rise in global temperatures to less than 2°C (in comparison with pre-industrial levels), with the stated objective of a 1.5°C limit. The Commission represented the EU at the UN Biodiversity Conference (known as COP15) held in Montréal, Canada, in December 2022, at which the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework was adopted, which aimed to prevent loss of biodiversity, restore ecosystems and protect the rights of indigenous peoples.
          
                    </p>
                    <p>
          In April 2009 the Council and the EP adopted a regulation on setting carbon dioxide (CO
          <sub>2</sub>
          ) emissions performance standards for new passenger cars. In September 2014 a directive on Clean Power for Transport was adopted, committing member states to developing national policies for the development of alternative fuels and introducing common technical specifications for recharging and refuelling stations. In October 2015 EU member states agreed to the gradual introduction, from September 2017, of supplementary Real Driving Emissions tests to help to determine whether new cars should be permitted to enter the vehicle market. In November 2017 the Commission published proposals for a Clean Mobility Package, comprising revised targets for CO
          <sub>2</sub>
           emissions from new cars and vans for both 2025 and 2030. In February 2023 the EP formally approved a proposal that the passenger car industry must achieve a 55% reduction in CO
          <sub>2</sub>
           emissions (compared with 2021 levels) from new cars sold from 2030 and a 100% cut by 2035 (effectively stopping the sale of petrol and diesel cars), so as to ensure the carbon neutrality of the transport sector by 2050. 
        </p>
                    <p>In September 2005 the Commission presented a them­atic strategy on air pollution, prepared under the auspices of Clean Air for Europe (CAFE), a programme launched in March 2001. The new air quality policy focused on particulates and ground-level ozone pollution, which were known to pose the greatest risk to human health. In April 2008 a new air quality directive was approved by the Council, which merged existing legislation into a single directive, and imposed limits on fine particle emissions (PM2.5) from vehicles, agriculture and small-scale industry for the first time. Emissions of PM2.5 in urban areas were to be reduced by 20% by 2020, compared with 2010 levels. A new CAFE was adopted in December 2013, specifying objectives for air quality until 2030. A new directive to minimize pollution from medium-sized combustion plants was adopted by the Council and the EP in November 2015, entering into force in December. In December 2016 the EP and the Council signed into law a new National Emissions Directive, with effect from 31 December, which strengthened limits on five principal pollutants and thus sought to reduce pollution-related ill health by almost 50% by 2030.</p>
                    <p>In October 2005 the Commission proposed a strategy to protect the marine environment, which aimed to ensure the environmental health of EU marine waters, under the sixth environmental action programme (EAP, 2002–12). A Marine Strategy Framework Directive was adopted by the EP and the Council in June 2008. A directive on the assessment and management of flood risks entered into force in November 2007, requiring member states to conduct preliminary assessments to identify river basins and associated coastal areas at risk of flooding, to develop flood risk maps for areas deemed to be at risk, and to establish flood risk management plans for these areas by 2015. In March 2009 the European Commission finalized an EU-wide review of the safety of pesticides used in plant protection products that were on the market before 1993; the review resulted in the removal from sale of more than two-thirds of the substances assessed. In September 2020 an EU report established European threshold values for beach litter, establishing that there should be fewer than 20 items of litter for every 100 metres of coastline. </p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio">In September 2000 a directive on end-of-life vehicles (ELVs) was adopted, which compelled manufacturers to pay for the disposal of new cars from July 2002 and of old cars from January 2007. EU directives on waste electronic and electrical equipment and the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electronic and electrical equipment came into force in February 2003. In January 2005 the Commission adopted a new strategy on reducing mercury pollution. Mercury exports from the EU have been prohibited since March 2011. </p>
                    <p>
          A regulation revising EU laws on trade in wild animals and plants was adopted in December 1996. A series of directives adopted in 2002 formulated new EU policy on the conservation of wild birds, fishing and protection for certain species of whales. In April 2012 the EP adopted a resolution on the EU 2020 Biodiversity Strategy, which sought to prevent the loss of the benefits of biodiversity and ecosystems and to help halt biodiversity loss worldwide by 2020. In June 2022 the Commission proposed a Nature Restoration Law to restore damaged ecosystems, aiming to have nature restoration measures in place in at least 20% of the EU’s land and sea areas by 2030, and in all damaged ecosystems in the EU by 2050. A directive on the protection of the environment through criminal law, originally adopted in 2008, was revised in 2023, with provisional agreement reached in November; under the directive, new penalties were to be introduced by member states for individuals or companies inflicting substantial environmental damage.
          
                         
                    </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.161" usage="ewyb edio">
          The voluntary Eco-Management and Audit Scheme was launched in April 1995. Under the scheme, participating industrial companies undergo an independent audit of their en­vironmental performance. In addition, the EU awards `ecolabels’ for products that limit harmful effects on the environment (including foodstuffs, beverages and pharmaceutical products, among others). A Green Claims Directive was put forward by the Commission in March 2023, which proposed penalizing companies making misleading environmental (`greenwashing’) claims.
          
           The directive was adopted by the European Council in February 2024.
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.4910" usage="ewyb edio">In October 2003 the Commission presented a new Registration, Evaluation and Authorisation of Chemicals system (REACH) environmental policy. Originally intended to collate safety information on tens of thousands of potentially dangerous chemicals used in consumer goods industries, following intensive lobbying by the chemicals industry sector, REACH’s scope was reduced. The REACH regulation was formally adopted in December 2006. The European Chem­icals Agency, which is responsible for managing REACH, commenced operations in Helsinki, Finland, in June 2007. In December 2008 the Commission adopted a regulation aligning the EU system of classification, labelling and packaging of chemical substances and mixtures to the UN Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals. In October 2020 the Commission adopted a new Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability.</p>
                    <p>The Institute for Environment and Sustainability, located in Ispra, Italy, was created in 2001 as part of the Joint Research Centre to provide research-based support to the development and implementation of European environmental policies. The earth observation programme Copernicus, managed by the European Commission and previously known as Global Monitoring for Environment and Security, provides information on six main areas: land, marine, atmosphere, climate change, emergency management and security. Data gathered by Copernicus is used to help to formulate environmental legislation and policy, to respond to emergency situations and to facilitate scientific research. The first Copernicus satellite was launched in April 2014 in French Guiana.</p>
                    <p>A new LIFE+ funding programme was adopted in May 2007, following on from the earlier LIFE programme for environment and climate action. The LIFE programme for 2014–20 was allocated a budget of some €3,400m., which was increased to €5,400m. for 2021–27, in current prices. In December 2012 the Commission announced proposals for the seventh EAP, with three principal thematic goals for 2014–20: the protection of nature and improvements in ecological resilience; increased sustainable, resource-efficient, low-carbon growth; and addressing environmental health risks. The programme also sought to improve the sustainability of EU cities, and to help the EU to address more effectively international environmental and climate challenges.</p>
                    <p>
          In February 2010 a Directorate-General for Climate Action was established, to help to mitigate the consequences of climate change, to ensure targets on climate change are met, and to oversee the EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS), launched in January 2005 as the EU Emissions Trading Scheme. The EU ETS obliged companies that exceeded their allocation of CO
          <sub>2</sub>
           emissions to buy extra allowances from more efficient companies or incur considerable fines. Individual companies were allocated a free greenhouse gas emission allowance by national governments. If they reduced emissions beyond their allocated quota, they were allowed to sell their credits on the open market. The first phase, covering 2005–07, applied only to large industrial and energy undertakings in certain sectors and only covered CO
          <sub>2</sub>
           emissions. Several member states opted to extend the scope of the EU ETS for the second trading period (2008–12), and it incorporated revised rules for monitoring and reporting, more stringent restrictions on emissions, and an increased number of combustion sources. A directive incorporating the aviation sector into the EU ETS, capping aviation sector emissions from January 2012, entered into force in February 2009. The third trading period (2013–20) introduced, notably, an EU-wide cap on emissions replacing the national targets hitherto in place. Auctioning (as opposed to free allocation) became the default method for the allocation of allowances. Measures were introduced to deal with a surplus of emission allowances, which had accumulated in the ETS since 2009. In January 2019 a new market stability reserve commenced operations in an effort to improve the resilience of the ETS to significant shocks by allowing excess allowances to be transferred to the reserve, thereby amending the supply of allowances for auction. During 2005–19 emissions from installations to which the ETS applied declined by some 35%. As part of the EU’s new European Green Deal (see below), the Commission introduced legislative proposals in July 2021 under the `Fit for 55’ programme for the implementation of new targets on sustainability, which were adopted by the Council in April 2023, lowering permitted emissions annually in energy generation, energy intensive industries and commercial aviation, aiming to reduce emissions by 62% by 2030 (compared with 2005 levels). Emissions from the shipping sector were also added to the EU ETS. At the same time, a new temporary Social Climate Fund was established, which was to operate in 2026–32 with a budget of €65,000m. (plus co-financing of 25% from the member states), to offer financial support to vulnerable citizens and small businesses in member states with energy efficiency measures. The EU ETS operates in all member states, as well as in Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway. As part of `Fit for 55’ a new Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) was introduced in a transitional phase from October 2023, which applied to certain carbon intensively produced imports (e.g. cement, iron and steel, electricity and fertilizers). In the initial phase, from January 2024 importers were obliged to report direct and indirect greenhouse gas emissions within their imports; payments under the CBAM certification system were due to start from January 2026.
          
                    </p>
                    
                    <p>The Renewable Energy Directive, adopted in 2009, established EU-wide policy for the production and promotion of energy from renewable sources. The renewable energy sector was to supply 20% of EU energy by 2020, compared with 6.6% in 1990 and 9.6% in 2004. </p>
                    <p>In January 2014 the Commission published a policy framework for energy and climate during 2020–30, which envisaged a 40% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions (compared with 1990 levels). In May 2014 the Commission announced a new Energy Security Strategy, and in February 2015 the Commission adopted the Framework Strategy for a Resilient Energy Union with a Forward-Looking Climate Change Policy, based around security, solidarity and trust; an integrated internal energy market; energy efficiency; climate action to `decarbonize’ the economy; and research, innovation and competitiveness.</p>
                    <p>In November 2016 the Commission proposed a Fourth Energy Package, to complete the internal energy market and implement the Energy Union. Adopted in 2019, the package comprised eight new pieces of legislation. The strategy revised energy targets for implementation by 2030, introducing a binding renewable energy target of at least 32%, and an energy efficiency target of at least 32.5%. The renewable energy target was revised upwards, to 42.5%, in March 2023; the provisional agreement also included targets for renewable energy in buildings, industry and transport, as well as shortening the permission process for wind farms and solar panels. </p>
                    <p>
          In December 2019 the European Commission published a communication on the new European Green Deal, which included the pledge to make the EU `carbon neutral’ by 2050, and to reduce carbon emissions to 55% of 1990 levels by 2030
          
           . The Commission presented an Investment Plan for the European Green Deal in January 2020, together with a Just Transition Mechanism, which aimed to ensure measures adopted were equitable, through the provision of targeted support. A new European Climate Law was proposed by the Commission in March, and a European Climate Pact was launched in December as an EU-wide initiative to involve various community institutions and organizations action to benefit the climate and the natural environment.
        </p>
                    <p>
          The eighth EAP, for 2021–27 identified six principal objectives: working to achieve the 2030 reduction target for greenhouse gas emissions and to attain climate neutrality by 2050; developing greater adaptive capacity and resilience, and limiting vulnerability to climate change; adapting a so-called regenerative growth model, by removing the link between economic growth and resource use, moving instead towards the evolution of a `circular’ economy; aiming for a `zero pollution’ strategy, with respect to air, water and soil, and working to protect the health of the EU population; protecting and restoring biodiversity and natural resources (air, water and soil, and related ecosystems); and reducing the environmental and climate-related impact linked to production and consumption (with respect, in particular, to energy, industry, infrastructure, mobility and food). Provisional political agreement was reached in March 2024 on a proposal for a regulation on packaging and packaging waste generated in the EU, to ensure that packaging is reused and recycled; and for a regulation holding companies (of more than 1,000 employees and at least €450m. in annual turnover) liable for supply-chain environmental or human rights abuses.
          
                    </p>
                    <p>
          In July 2020 the Commission adopted new strategies for the integration of energy systems and for investment in the use of clean hydrogen technologies to help to achieve its objectives. It was envisaged that the contribution of renewable hydrogen to EU energy production would increase from less than 2% in 2018 to 13%–14% by 2050. In July 2021 the Commission adopted proposals on `Delivering the European Green Deal’, confirming a Europe 2030 emissions reduction target of at least 55% by 2030 (`Fit for 55’), in comparison with 1990 levels, and the intention for the EU to be `carbon neutral’ by 2050. Five pieces of `Fit for 55’ legislation were adopted by the Council in April 2023, revising the EU ETS (see above). In its programme for 2023, the Commission stated that it aimed to establish a `hydrogen bank’ that would assist in the scaling up of the EU green hydrogen economy and invest in developing a hydrogen market; a first pilot auction for €800m. in subsidies payable to producers of renewable hydrogen was launched in November. In February 2023 the Commission put forward the Green Deal Industrial Plan, which would aim to increase the production capacity of key green technologies in the EU (see 
          <xr id="WB02048.IO.TXT.275" pageref="N">
                              <i>Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises</i>
                         </xr>
          ).
        </p>
                    
                    <p>
          In March 2022, in response to the Russian Federation’s military invasion of Ukraine on 24 February, the European Commission published proposals to end the reliance of EU member states on Russian fossil fuels, notably gas, before 2030. The proposals also provided for measures to be introduced in response to rising energy prices across the EU and to ensure adequate gas stocks in the short term. The Versailles Declaration was adopted on 10–11 March, comprising, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , a declaration on the Russian aggression against Ukraine, and the EU’s stated commitment to reducing energy dependency on Russia. A new scheme, REPowerEU, was developed with the aim of diversifying gas supplies, accelerating the use of renewable energy and reducing the EU’s dependence on Russian gas. A temporary emergency regulation was proposed by the Commission in November 2022 to accelerate the REPowerEU programme, and political agreement was reached in December between the EP and the Council on the financing of REPowerEU through the Recovery and Resilience Facility as part of member states’ Recovery and Resilience Plans. In December the Commission proposed emergency intervention to reduce demand for electricity and to assist consumers with high energy costs. 
        </p>
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>