<int-org-sectref id="SL1112019" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112018" slsdocid="1103229" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.272" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Fisheries</heading>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">The Common Fisheries Policy (CFP), which came into effect in January 1983, confirmed a 200-mile (370-km) zone around the regional coastline (excluding the Mediterranean) within which all members had access to fishing, and allowed exclusive national zones of six miles with access between six and 12 miles from the shore for other countries according to specified historic rights. Rules furthering conservation (e.g. standards for fishing tackle) were imposed under the policy, with checks by a Community fisheries inspectorate. In December 1992 European Community ministers agreed to extend the CFP for a further 10-year period. Two years later ministers concluded a final agreement on the revised CFP, allowing Spain and Portugal to be integrated into the policy by 1 January 1996. In October 1995 ministers for fisheries agreed a regime to control fishing in the so-called Irish box, off south-west Ireland.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.31" usage="ewyb edio casee">The organization of fish marketing involved common rules on size, weight, quality and packing and a system of guide prices established annually by the Council. Export subsidies were introduced to enable the export of fish onto the lower-priced world market, and import levies were introduced to prevent competition from low-priced imports. A new import regime took effect from May 1993, enabling regional fishermen’s associations to increase prices to up to 10% over the Community’s reference price.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.34" usage="ewyb edio">With a view to protecting marine life such as dolphins and sharks, the Council prohibited the use of drift nets in the Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea in June 1998 (the ban entered into force in January 2002) and in the Baltic Sea in March 2004 (with effect from January 2008). In April 2004 the Council adopted a regulation stipulating the use of active acoustic deterrent devices on fishing nets throughout most EU waters, to prevent dolphins and porpoises from becoming entangled in the nets.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.37" usage="ewyb edio">With concern over the depletion of mature fish stocks continuing to mount (cod stocks in the North Sea were calculated in the early 2000s to have declined to one-10th of their 1970 level), in June 2002 the Commission proposed a procedure for setting annual total allowable catches (TACs). The Commission also proposed the temporary closure of areas where endangered species had congregated, and more generous EU aid for the decommissioning of vessels. In December 2002 the Commission introduced catch limits for deep-water fish species, complemented by a system of deep-sea fishing permits (TACs for deep-sea fishing are revised every two years). In 2004 the Commission extended the scope of the use of TACs to more fish stocks and introduced a number of closed areas for heavily depleted species.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.2002" usage="ewyb edio casee">Radical reform of the CFP, aimed at ensuring the sustainable development of the industry, was announced in 2002. New measures were introduced in January 2003 substantially amending structural assistance in the fisheries sector. The new framework provided for a long-term approach to maintaining fish stocks. Quotas for catches of cod, whiting and haddock were reduced, fishermen were guaranteed only nine days a month at sea (with provision to extend this to 15 days in some circumstances), and public funding for the renewal or modernization of fishing boats (which tends to increase the fishing catch) was largely abolished after 2004. Measures were also announced to develop co-operation among the various fisheries authorities and to strengthen the uniformity of control and sanctions throughout the EU. In an attempt to compensate for the ongoing decline of the EU fishing fleet, a number of socioeconomic measures were introduced, including aid from member states to those who had temporarily to halt their fishing activities and for the retraining of fishermen for work outside the fisheries sector, while permitting them to continue fishing on a part-time basis. A regulation setting up an emergency fund to encourage the decommissioning of vessels was also adopted.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.349876" usage="ewyb edio casee">In July 2004 the Council adopted a common framework on the establishment of regional advisory councils (RACs) to facilitate co-operation in maintaining sustainable fisheries. In April 2005 a Community Fisheries Control Agency (now European Fisheries Control Agency—EFCA) was established to strengthen the uniformity and effectiveness of enforcement of fisheries regulations by pooling EU and individual countries’ means of control and monitoring and by co-ordinating enforcement activities.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">In January 2009 the European Commission adopted the first EU Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks, which also aimed to protect related species, such as skates and rays, within and outside European waters. In January 2010 new rules to strengthen the CFP control system entered into force, comprising regulations on combating illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing; authorizations for the EU fleet operating outside EU waters; and a control system for ensuring compliance with CFP rules. Under the new IUU regulations, all marine fishery products traded within the EU were to be certified and their origin made traceable under a comprehensive catch certification scheme. In May 2018 the Commission published proposals for reform of the Fisheries Control System, to take into account changes introduced by reform of the CFP. Negotiations between the Council and the European Parliament (EP) began in late 2021, and provisional agreement was reached in May 2023 to update existing rules on fishing vessels in order to prevent overfishing.</p>
                    <p>The Commission published its draft proposals for CFP reform in July 2011, which provided for returning fish stocks to sustainable levels. Clear targets and timetables were to be introduced to prevent overfishing and to benefit small-scale fisheries, while providing transferrable fishing concessions. In February 2013 EU ministers responsible for fisheries agreed gradually to introduce the so-called landing obligation from 2015, effectively banning discards (dead fish and marine organisms unintentionally caught in excess of quotas that were dumped overboard) by 2019. The reformed CFP came into effect on 1 January 2014 following its approval by the Council and the EP in October and December 2013, respectively.</p>
                    <p>The European Fisheries Fund (EFF), which functioned during 2007–13 as the financial instrument of the CFP, was replaced by a new European Maritime and Fisheries Fund (EMFF), with a budget of some €6,400m. for 2014–20. The EMFF was responsible for implementing the objectives of the revised CFP, assisting fishermen to adapt to more sustainable methods of fishing and helping coastal areas to diversify their economies. In July 2016 European Commission proposal was adopted, which extended the responsibilities of the EFCA to help to improve border control and security by exchanging information with the new European Border and Coast Guard Agency and the Euro­pean Maritime Safety Agency.</p>
                    <p>In December 2016 the EP and the Council adopted a regulation strengthening deep-sea fishing regulations in the north-east Atlantic, in order further to contribute to sustainability. The CFP committed the EU to returning overall fish stocks to sustainable levels by 2020. Particularly in northern and western waters, overfishing decreased substantially, and fish stocks increased; however, although in 2016 biomass there, on average, was almost 39% greater than the 2003 level, the EU was unable to fulfil the 2020 target.</p>
                    <p>A new European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund (EMFAF) replaced the EMFF for 2021–27, with funding amounting to some €6,100m., in current prices. The majority of funding was to be used for the management of fisheries (with a particular focus on small-scale, coastal fisheries), the promotion of aquaculture and fishing fleets, while the remainder was to provide for other measures, including scientific advice, monitoring, and maritime surveillance and security.</p>
                    <p>The Commission put forward proposals in February 2023 for the fisheries sector (which is highly reliant on fossil fuels) to work towards climate neutrality by 2050, which included an Energy Transition Partnership for EU Fisheries and Aquaculture. The proposals also included measures—the Marine Action Plan—to address climate change, pollution, loss of biodiversity and the impact of fishing on the seabed, with an action plan to mitigate the effect of fishing on marine ecosystems as part of the EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030. A Pact for Fisheries and Oceans was proposed in early 2023, and as part of this a `Fishers of the Future’ participatory project was launched in November to examine the future role of the fisheries sector up to 2050.</p>
                    <p>
          Meanwhile, following the UK’s departure from the EU on 31 January 2020, bilateral negotiations took place during 2020 to determine issues including access to fisheries, for implementation from the beginning of 2021. The final trade and co-operation agreement, with provisional effect from 1 January 2021, provided for 25% of EU fishing rights in UK waters to be transferred to the British fishing fleet over the course of a five-year adjustment period, to conclude at the end of June 2026. Under the terms of the agreement, EU access to UK waters was to be reduced by 15% in the first year and by 2.5 percentage points in each subsequent year. Access to UK waters was to be subject to re-negotiation at the end of the adjustment period. In December 2021 the Council approved an EU-UK fishing agreement, determining rights and TACs for shared fish stocks in EU and UK waters during 2022; agreement was reached in December 2022 and 2023 on fishing rights for shared fish stocks for 2023 and 2024, respectively, including for
          
           certain deep-sea stocks.
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.XX" usage="ewyb edio">Bilateral fisheries agreements have also been signed with other countries (Norway, the Faroe Islands and Iceland—although that agreement is described as `dormant’) allowing limited reciprocal fishing rights and other advantages (`reciprocity agreements’), and with some African and Indian Ocean countries and Pacific Islands that receive technical and financial assistance in strengthening their fishing industries in return for allowing EU boats to fish in their waters. Following the withdrawal of Greenland from the Community in February 1985, Community vessels retained fishing rights in Greenland’s waters, in exchange for financial compensation. </p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>