<int-org-sectref id="SL1112137" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112136" slsdocid="1103447" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.292" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio sacac">
                    <heading>Latin America</heading>
                    <p id="IO-EU.SACAC.001">
          A non-preferential trade agreement was signed with Uruguay in 1974, and economic and commercial co-operation agreements with Mexico in 1975 and with Brazil in 1980. A five-year co-operation agreement with the members of the Central American Common Market and with Panama entered into force in 1987, as did a similar agreement with the member countries (see below) of the Andean Group (now the 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="CAN.IO">Andean Community</xr>
          ). Co-operation agreements were signed with Argentina and Chile in 1990, and in that year tariff preferences were approved for Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru, in support of those countries’ efforts to combat drug trafficking. In May 1992 an interinstitutional co-operation agreement was signed with the Southern Common Market (Mercado Común del Sur—MERCOSUR); in June a new co-operation agreement was initialled with the member states of the Andean Group (Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela); a new co-operation agreement was also signed with Brazil. In July 1993 the EC introduced a tariff regime to limit the import of bananas from Latin America, in order to protect the banana pro­ducing countries of the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) group, then linked to the EC by the 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="WB02049.IO.TXT.1">Lomé Convention</xr>
          . The EU-ACP Partnership Agreement, known as the Cotonou Agreement, entered into force on 1 April 2003. In December 2009, in resolution to a long dispute over the tariff regime, the EU and Latin American states initialled the EU-Latin America Bananas Agreement, which provided for a gradual reduction in the tariff rate. Since April 2020 the ACP states have been known collectively as the 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="ECDEVT.IO.1">Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States (OACPS)</xr>
          . An OACPS-EU Partnership Agreement was initialled in mid-April 2021. In July 2023 the Council adopted a decision on the signature and provisional application of the agreement, which was signed officially by the EU and the EU member states in November at the 46th session of the ACP-EU Council of Ministers, held in Samoa. The agreement was provisionally applied from 1 January 2024 (pending ratification by all parties).
        </p>
                    <p-alternates default="EDIO" type="ALTERNATES">
                         <p usage="edio sacac">From 1996 closer links were forged with Latin America, by means of strengthened political ties, an increase in economic integration and free trade, and co-operation in other areas. The first summit meeting of all EU and Latin American and Caribbean heads of state or of government was held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1999, when a Strategic Partnership was launched. In October 2016 the EU announced new programmes supported by funding of over €74m. to stimulate sustainable development in Latin America (€30m.) and the Caribbean (€44m.). The EU allocated more than €3,400m. to the region, for country and regional programmes, in the period 2021–27, under the Neighbourhood, Development and International Cooperation Instrument—Global Europe.</p>
                         <p usage="ewyb">The first summit meeting of all EU and Latin American and Caribbean heads of state or of government was held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1999, when a Strategic Partnership was launched. In October 2016 the EU announced new programmes supported by funding of over €74m. to stimulate sustainable development in Latin America (€30m.) and the Caribbean (€44m.). In May 2019 the Council adopted conclusions on relations between the EU and Latin America and the Caribbean, after a joint communication was published in mid-April by the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the European Commission, entitled `The European Union, Latin America and the Caribbean: Joining Forces for a Common Future’. The EU sought to enhance its political partnership with the region, focusing on the areas of prosperity, democracy, resilience and global governance. The EU allocated more than €3,400m. to the region, for country and regional programmes, in the period 2021–27, under the Neighbourhood, Development and International Cooperation Instrument—Global Europe.</p>
                    </p-alternates>
                    <p>In July 1997 the EU and Mexico concluded an Economic Partnership, Political Co-ordination and Co-operation Agreement (the Global Agreement) and an interim agreement on trade. The accords were signed in December, and a free trade agreement entered into effect in October 2000; provisions relating to trade in services entered into force in 2001. In July 2008 the European Commission agreed to launch a strategic partnership with Mexico. In May 2016 the EU and Mexico initiated negotiations to reform the Global Agreement. In April 2020 the EU and Mexico concluded negotiations on the new trade accord.</p>
                    <p>
          In May 2007 the European Commission proposed a strategic partnership with Brazil, in recognition of its increasing international prominence and strong bilateral ties with Europe. The first EU-Brazil summit was held in Lisbon, Portugal, in July. In November 2002 the EU and Chile signed an Association Agreement, which included a free trade agreement that entered into force in 2003. Negotiations for a renewed Association Agreement commenced in November 2017 and were finalized in November 2022; the new EU-Chile Advanced Framework Agreement was signed in December 2023
          
           .
        </p>
                    <p id="IO-EU.SACAC.004">In December 1994 the EU and MERCOSUR signed a joint declaration that aimed to promote trade liberalization and greater political co-operation. In December 1995 a framework agreement on the establishment of a free trade regime between the two organizations was signed. In June 1999 negotiations commenced towards an Association Agreement and free trade agreement with MERCOSUR. Political agreement in principle on a comprehensive trade agreement with the founding members of MERCOSUR (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay) was reached in June 2019.</p>
                    
                    <p>A Political Dialogue and Co-operation Agreement with the Andean Community and its member states was signed in December 2003. At the fourth EU-Latin America/Caribbean (EU-LAC) summit, held in Vienna, Austria, in May 2006, it was decided to initiate negoti­ations for Association Agreements with Central America and with the Andean Community. The meeting also endorsed a proposal to establish an EU-Latin America parliamentary assembly, which met for the first time in November. In 2007 the EU concluded negotiations for an Economic Partnership Agreement with the Caribbean Forum (CARIFORUM) grouping of 16 states, which was signed in October 2008. In March 2010 a trade agreement was reached between the EU and Colombia and Peru. It was signed in June 2012, and entered into provisional effect from 2013. Ecuador’s accession to the trade agreement took provisional effect from the beginning of 2017. Meanwhile, in May 2010 the EU concluded negotiations on an Association Agreement with Central America (covering Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama), in the areas of trade, political dialogue and co-operation. The Association Agreement was signed in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, in June 2012, and was provisionally implemented during the second half of 2013.</p>
                    <p>
          In 2010 the former Rio Group of Latin American and Caribbean states merged with Cumbres América Latina y Caribe (CALC—internal LAC Summits), under the framework of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC), which began to represent the region in negotiations with third countries and regional groupings. The first EU-CELAC summit meeting took place in Santiago, Chile, in January 2013. In June the EU and the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States established diplomatic relations. In May 2014 a new EU-Central America Political Dialogue and Co-operation Agreement entered into effect, pending ratification of the Association Agreement (the trade element of which had already come into effect). In November 2012 the Council had endorsed a Joint Caribbean-EU Partnership Strategy, which was conceived at an EU-CARIFORUM summit held in Madrid, Spain, in May 2010. The second EU-CELAC (and the eighth EU-LAC) summit was held in Brussels in June 2015. Following a meeting in October 2020 of EU and CELAC senior officials for science and technology, in July 2021 a strategic roadmap for 2021–23 was approved by the EU. An EU-CELAC summit was held in Brussels in July 2023; at the end of the summit a declaration was adopted by all participating countries with the exception of one CELAC country, which disagreed with a section of the text dealing with the ongoing conflict in Ukraine.
          
                    </p>
                    <p id="IO-EU.SACAC.007">
          An EU legation office opened in the Cuban capital, Havana, in March 2003, and the EU supported a renewed application by Cuba to join the successor to the Lomé Convention, the Cotonou Agreement. However, the imprisonment of dissidents by the Cuban regime in April led the EU to downgrade diplomatic relations with Cuba. In May Cuba withdrew its application for membership of the Cotonou Agreement, and in July it announced that it would not accept aid from the EU and would terminate all political contact with the organization. In January 2005 Cuba restored diplomatic ties with EU states. At the end of that month the EU temporarily suspended the diplomatic sanctions imposed on Cuba in mid-2003 and announced its intention to resume a `constructive dialogue’ with the Cuban authorities. The EU extended the temporary suspension of diplomatic sanctions against Cuba for one year in June 2005, and annually thereafter. Sanctions were lifted in June 2008, subject to an annual review. In August 2014 a National Indicative Programme for Cuba was adopted, making available €50m. for 2014–20 in order to address sustainable agriculture and food security; environmental issues; and sustainable economic and social development. Projects in 2021–27 were to focus on the Cuban economy; energy; sustainability; communications technology; and development co-operation and access to COVID-19 vaccines
          
           . Negotiations on a Political Dialogue and Co-operation Agreement (PDCA) were concluded with Cuba in March 2016; the agreement was signed in December, and approved by the European Parliament in July 2017; the PDCA was applied provisionally from November. The first ministerial level EU-Cuba Joint Council under the PDCA was held in Brussels in May 2018.
        </p>
                    <p>Sanctions, including an arms embargo, were imposed on Venezuela in November 2017, in response to a deterioration in democracy and human rights in that country. Sanctions were subsequently strengthened.</p>
                    <p id="EU.IO.SACAC.8" usage="sacac">
          In May 2010 the Latin American Investment Facility (LAIF) was officially launched with the aim of promoting investment in Latin America by beneficiary governments and public organizations. For 2024 €111.6m. was allocated for humanitarian aid to Central and South America and the Caribbean by the European Commission’s Directorate-General for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations (DG ECHO), in particular to respond to 
          
          ongoing conflicts and crises, and natural hazards.
          
                    </p>
                    <p>
          In June 2023 the Commission and the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy adopted a joint communication on a New Agenda for relations between the EU and Latin America and the Caribbean, aiming to reinforce political engagement and support trade and investment through the Global Gateway strategy as well as to promote sustainable economic growth and co-operate on human rights and the rule of law.
          
                    </p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>