<int-org-sectref id="SL1112039" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112038" slsdocid="1103267" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.276" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Competition</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.74" usage="ewyb edio casee">The Treaty of Rome establishing the European Economic Community (now the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union—TFEU) provided for the creation of a common market based on the free movement of goods, people, services and capital. Article 101 of the TFEU bans anti-competitive agreements between market operators, while Article 102 prohibits abusive behaviour by companies. The EU’s competition policy aims to guarantee the unity of the internal market, by providing access to a range of high-quality goods and services, at competitive prices. The Commission has wide investigative powers in the area of competition policy. It may act on its own initiative, or after a complaint from a member state, firm or individual, or after being notified of agreements or planned state aid. Before taking a decision, the Commission organizes hearings; its decisions can be challenged before the General Court and the European Court of Justice, or in national courts.</p>
                    <p>Prior to the enlargement of the EU in May 2004, the Commission worked to establish detailed provisions for a modernised framework for antitrust and merger control. In that month major changes to EU competition law and policy (including reform of the European Community Merger Regulation) entered into force. The European Competition Network commenced operations in 2004, comprising the competition authorities of all EU member states and the Commission. A directive signed into law in December 2018 empowers national competition authorities to enforce competition policy more effectively, and to help improve uniformity throughout the EU.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.76" usage="ewyb edio casee">The TFEU prohibits any state aid, agreements and practices that distort or threaten to distort competition in the common market (for example by discriminating in favour of certain firms or the production of certain goods, price-fixing, imposing production or delivery quotas, market-sharing agreements, creating exclusive collective markets, collective boycotting, and voluntary restraints on competitive behaviour); however, some exceptions are permitted where the proposed aid may have a beneficial impact in overall Union terms or where certain types of co-operation may considered to be positive, such as agreements promoting technical and economic progress. In the period 2019–23 fines amounting to 3,796.8m. were imposed on cartels.</p>
                    <p>
          As an integral part of competition policy, control of state aid helps to maintain competitive markets. The Commission acts to recover any illegal or incompatible state aid. The procedural rules on state aid were consolidated and clarified in 1999, and provided for several exemptions, notably regarding the provision of aid to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and for training. Amid widespread recession, in December 2008 the European Commission adopted a Temporary Framework for State Aid, which aimed to assist member states in co-ordinating the provision of credit facilities to businesses until 2010 (later extended until the end of 2011). In December 2011 the Commission revised and extended rules governing state aid to financial institutions during the ongoing economic crisis. A revised methodology was also agreed concerning the remuneration of guarantees for banks’ funding needs. The rules were to apply for as long as required by market conditions, and were amended in August 2013. Meanwhile, in February 2012 the Commission published a guidance paper on state aid-compliant financing, and restructuring and privatization of state-owned enterprises. In July 2014, as part of its State Aid Modernisation initiative, the Commission adopted amended guidelines for evaluating the support measures applied by member states for companies experiencing difficulties. The guidelines (which did not apply to financial institutions) sought to ensure that public funding was channelled appropriately and that investors assumed an equitable proportion of restructuring costs, rather than allowing the burden to be carried by taxpayers. In July 2016 mandatory transparency requirements for state aid came into force. Since 2001 the Commission has analysed state aid granted by member states in its State Aid Scoreboard. According to the 2022 State Aid Scoreboard, in 2021 EU member states spent €334,540m. (representing some 2.3% of gross domestic product—GDP) on state aid (excluding aid to railways and the financial sector). 
          
                    </p>
                    <p>
          In mid-March 2020 the Commission proposed a new Temporary Framework for State Aid to support the economy amid the COVID-19 pandemic, aiming, 
          <i>inter alia, </i>
          to enable member states to establish schemes to provide direct grants (or tax advantages) to businesses; to offer public and private loans with subsidized rates of interest; and to direct aid to the economy via banks in order to safeguard customers, in particular SMEs. The Framework was expanded during 2020 and repeatedly extended
          
           until 30 June 2022, after which a transitionary period for the restructuring of debt instruments until 30 June 2023 was introduced. In March 2022 the Commission adopted the State Aid Temporary Crisis and Transition Framework, in the context of the Russian Federation’s invasion of Ukraine, to assist businesses affected by the conflict; the Framework was to be operational until the end of 2025, as part of the Green Deal Industrial Plan (see 
          <i>Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises</i>
          ).
        </p>
                    
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.78" usage="ewyb edio casee">Mergers that would significantly impede competition in the common market are banned. The Commission examines prospective mergers in order to decide whether they are compatible with competition principles. In July 2001 the EU blocked a merger between two US companies for the first time, on the grounds that EU companies would be adversely affected. A new merger regulation came into force in May 2004, introducing some flexibility into the timeframe for investigations into proposed mergers. Measures to simplify procedures for reviewing mergers came into effect from 1 January 2014.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.80" usage="ewyb edio casee">The Commission seeks to abolish monopolies in the networks supplying basic services to member states. Liberalization has been pursued in the provision of postal services, and the gas and electricity, telecommunications and transport sectors. In December 2006 a directive entered into force opening up the services sector to cross-border competition. Notably, a company offering services in another country would be governed by the rules and regulations of the country in which the service was being provided (rather than those of the company’s home country, as the Commission had favoured). The European Parliament agreed a list of legitimate reasons that a country could cite for restricting the activities of foreign service providers, such as national security, public health and environmental protection.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.4523" usage="ewyb edio">In April 2015 the Commission alleged that the US technology company Google had abused its market dominance by distorting results in its search engine in favour of its own shopping services; an antitrust investigation was also launched into the company’s Android mobile operating system. In June 2017 the Commission imposed a fine of €2,424.5m. on Google for violating EU antitrust rules by giving illegal preference to its own shopping services. Two further antitrust cases brought against Google by the EU meant that fines issues to the company had reached a total of over €8,200m.</p>
                    <p>The Directorate-General for Competition co-operates with foreign competition authorities and promotes competition instruments in applicant countries, where it also provides technical assistance.</p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>