<int-org-sectref id="SL1112150" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112149" slsdocid="1103459" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.295" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                    <heading>Generalized System of Preferences</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.266">In July 1971 the EC introduced a generalized system of preferences (GSP) for tariffs in favour of developing countries, ensuring duty free entry to the EC of all manufactured and semi-manufactured industrial products, including textiles, but subject in certain circumstances to preferential limits. Preferences, usually in the form of a tariff reduction, were also offered on some agricultural products. In 1980 the Council adopted an operational framework for industrial products, based on the degree of competitiveness of the developing country concerned. From 1977 the EC progres­sively liberalized GSP access for the least developed countries (LDCs) by according them duty-free entry on all products and by exempting them from virtually all preferential limits.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.267">In December 1994 the European Council adopted a revised GSP for 1995–98, which provided additional trade benefits to encourage environmentally sound policies and internationally recognized labour standards. Conversely, a country’s preferential entitlement could be withdrawn, for example, if it permitted forced labour. Duties were eliminated in their entirety (with the exception of arms and ammunition) for 49 LDCs. Duties were also suspended for five Latin American countries, conditional on the implementation of campaigns against the production and trade of illegal drugs. In 2001 a trade scheme in support of LDCs, Everything but Arms (EBA), was introduced, which granted those countries duty- and quota-free access to EU markets. By the time the GSP for 2006–08 was agreed, the total number of products covered had expanded to some 7,200. Additional preferences were granted under the GSP+ incentive scheme to particularly vulnerable countries pursuing good governance and sustainable development policies. Countries eligible for GSP+ must ratify and implement 27 international conventions and agree to co-operate with the European Commission in monitoring their implementation; the Commission publishes a report every two years on their progress.</p>
                    <p>
          A revised GSP entered into effect on 1 January 2014, which aimed to strengthen GSP+ and increase the effectiveness of trade concessions for the LDCs through the EBA scheme, increase transparency, and was to be renewable every 10 years (with the exception of EBA, which did not require renewal). Developing countries are eligible for the GSP if they have an income level below `upper middle income’, as classified by the World Bank, and provided that they are not beneficiaries of another arrangement (such as a free trade agreement) that gives them preferential access to EU markets. However, LDCs receive the benefits of the EBA scheme even if they do have another arrangement in place. All countries benefiting from the GSP must observe the principles of 15 specific conventions relating to human and labour rights. In February 2020 the European Commission withdrew some of the tariff preferences granted to Cambodia under the EBA trade scheme owing to human rights violations. A Council mandate was agreed in December 2022 on the revision of the GSP; negotiations between the Council presidency and the European Parliament (EP) were to take place, with the new rules intended to come into force in January 2024 on the expiry of the existing GSP. In July 2023 the Commission put forward proposals to extend the GSP from 2024–27
          
          , in the absence of an agreement on a revised system; an amendment to the existing GSP was duly signed by the Council and the EP in November.
          
                    </p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>