<int-org-sectref id="SL1112023" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112022" slsdocid="1103238" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.273" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Research and Innovation</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.40" usage="edio casee">In the amendments to the Treaty of Rome, effective from July 1987 (now the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union), a section on research and technology (subsequently restyled `research and innovation’) was included, defining the extent of Community co-operation in this area. Most of the funds allocated to research and innovation are granted to companies or institutions that apply to participate in EU research programmes.</p>
                    <p>In January 2000 the Commission launched an initiative to establish a European Research Area (ERA) to promote the more effective use of scientific resources within a single area, in order to enhance the EU’s competitiveness and generate employment. The European Research Council (ERC), an independent funding body for science, commenced operations in February 2007. The mandate of the European Research Area Committee (now European Research Area and Innovation Committee) was approved by the Council in May 2010, replacing a Scientific and Technical Research Committee established in 1995; it provides strategic policy advice to the Council, the Commission and the EU member states on research and innovation issues of relevance to the ERA.</p>
                    <p>In February 2006 the Commission recommended the establishment of a European Institute of Technology (EIT), to promote excellence in higher education, research and innovation, and based on a Europe-wide network of `knowledge and innovation communities’ (partnerships comprising higher education institutions, research organizations, companies and other interested parties). From April 2010 the headquarters of the EIT (known as the European Institute of Innovation and Technology since 2008) were based in Budapest, Hungary.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">
          In December 2006 the Council adopted a decision establishing the Seventh Framework Programme for research and technological development (FP7, which was implemented during 2007–13), and also established the Seventh Framework Programme of Euratom, for nuclear research and training activities in 2007–11. In October 2010 the Commission adopted a communication on the Innovation Union, designed to help the EU economy to recover from economic crisis, by encouraging global competitiveness and innovation. FP7 was superseded by the EU Framework Programme for Research and Innovation, `Horizon 2020’, covering 2014–20, with a budget of some €80,000m. In 2015, under Horizon 2020, the three policy objectives of open innovation, open science, and open to the world were established. Horizon 2020 was superseded by Horizon Europe for 2021–27, with a budget of €76,400m. (in 2018 prices), plus additional funding of some €8,000m. Horizon Europe introduced a new European Innovation Council (EIC), intended to complement the work of the EIT. The EIC, which became operational in 2018–20 during a pilot phase, supports innovation by means of two funding instruments: the EIC Pathfinder supports researchers investigating `high risk, high gain’ new technologies, while the EIC Accelerator supports innovative projects being developed by small and medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs). The EIC became fully operational in March 2021, and a new European Innovation Council and SMEs Executive Agency was established in Brussels. The EU’s research and innovation budget for 2021–27 (in 2018 prices) also allocated €1,757m. to the Euratom Research and Training Programme and €5,000m. to the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER—see 
          <i>Energy, Environment and Climate</i>
          ).
        </p>
                    <p>In order to provide analysis of the EU’s performance in innovation, the Commission has used a set of performance indicators to draw up an annual European Innovation Scoreboard (EIS). The EIS for 2023 identified Denmark as the top innovator, and other `innovation leaders’ as Sweden, Finland, the Netherlands and Belgium.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.45" usage="ewyb edio">
          The EU has made efforts to integrate space science into its research activities, and has collaborated with the 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="ESA.IO">European Space Agency (ESA)</xr>
          . In September 2000 the EU and ESA adopted a joint European Strategy for Space, and the two bodies established a joint task force in 2001. A jointly drafted European Space Policy, providing a common political framework for space activities in Europe, was adopted in May 2007. The European Commission, ESA and Eurocontrol developed the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service (EGNOS), the first pan-European satellite navigation system, extending the US Global Positioning System (GPS). In April 2009 ownership of EGNOS was transferred to the Commission. The Commission and ESA have also collaborated in the development of a European satellite and navigation system, Galileo, consisting of about 30 satellites at full operational capability, a global network of tracking stations, and central control facilities in Europe. The European Global Navigation Satellite System Supervisory Authority intended to use the Galileo, GPS and Global Navigation Satellite systems to provide a global, integrated satellite navigation service under civilian control. Galileo became operational in December 2016. Meanwhile, in October a new Space Strategy for Europe was announced by the Commission, which aimed, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , to encourage Galileo to be utilized by mobile devices and to increase connectivity in remote locations; to facilitate access to satellite data by companies, in order to develop new services and applications; to encourage private investment for relevant new businesses; and to support the development of industrial space hubs in European regions. The EU and ESA signed a declaration on a joint European space policy, demonstrating the importance to both institutions of close co-operation on space. A new `space port’, at Esrange in Sweden’s far north, the first mainland satellite launch port
          
           in the EU, was inaugurated in early 2023.
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.47" usage="ewyb edio">The Joint Research Centre (JRC) was established in 1958, in Brussels, Belgium, under the European Atomic Energy Community. Directed by the European Commission, but relying for much of its funding on individual contracts, the JRC is based across six sites, in five countries—Ispra, Italy; Brussels and Geel, Belgium; Karlsruhe, Germany; Seville, Spain; and Petten, Netherlands. Although nuclear research and development remain major concerns of the institutes, their research efforts have diversified substantially.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.48" usage="ewyb edio casee">The EU co-operates with non-member countries in bilateral research projects. The Commission and more than 48 (mainly European) countries—including EU members as individuals—participate, as full members, in the EUREKA (European Research Co-ordination Agency) programme of research and development in market-orientated industrial technology, which was launched in 1985. The EU’s research and development information service (CORDIS) disseminates the findings of EU-funded research programmes.</p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>