<int-org-sectref id="SL1112097" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112096" slsdocid="1103340" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.285" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Financial Services and Capital Movements</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.170" usage="ewyb edio casee">Freedom of capital movements and the creation of a uniform financial area were regarded as vital for the completion of the EU’s internal market by 1992. A second banking directive (the first was adopted in 1977), which entered into force on 1 January 1993, aimed to create a single community licence for banking, permitting a bank established in one member country to open branches in another. Other measures were adopted, with the aim of ensuring the capital adequacy of credit institutions and the prevention of money laundering. In 1987 a Council directive came into force which required member states to remove restrictions on: long-term credits related to commercial trans­actions; acquisition of securities; and the admission of securities to capital markets. In June 1988 the Council approved a directive removing all restrictions on capital movements by 1 July 1990. A number of countries were per­mitted to exercise restrictions until the end of 1992, and further extensions were granted to Portugal and Greece. With the entry into force of the Maastricht Treaty in November 1993, the principle of full freedom of capital movements was incorporated into the structure of the EU.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.171" usage="ewyb edio casee">The EU worked to develop a single market in financial services throughout the 1990s. A Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) was published in May 1999, with three strategic objectives: to establish a single market in wholesale financial services; to make retail markets open and secure; and to strengthen the rules on prudential supervision in order to keep pace with new sources of financial risk. An overall banking directive was adopted in March 2000. Non-bank institutions became eligible for a `European passport’ on compliance with the principles of the EU’s first banking directive on the mutual recognition of licences, prudential super­vision and supervision by the home member state. A directive on the reorganization and closure of failed credit institutions with branches in more than one member state entered into force in May 2004. During 2002 a directive was drawn up on the supplementary supervision of financial conglomerates. Individual targets specified in the FSAP included removing outstanding barriers to raising capital within the EU; creating a coherent legal framework for supplementary pension funds; and providing greater legal certainty in cross-border securities trading. A directive establishing harmonized rules on the cross-border distance-selling of financial services was adopted in June 2002. In November 2003 the Commission adopted a package of measures to establish a new organizational architecture in all financial services sectors.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">Two proposed directives were issued in November 2000, relating to interest and royalties and concerning the code of conduct for business taxation. Together with the savings tax directive, these were known as the EU tax package, the terms of which were agreed by EU ministers of finance in June 2003. The package consisted of a political code of conduct to eliminate harmful business tax regimes; a legislative measure to ensure an effective minimum level of taxation of savings income; and a legislative measure to eliminate source taxes on cross-border payments of interest and royalties between associated companies. A savings tax directive, which entered into force on 1 July 2005, aimed to prevent EU citizens from avoiding taxes on savings by keeping their money in foreign bank accounts. Transitional measures applied to Austria, Belgium and Luxembourg. Negotiations were concluded with Switzerland, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Andorra and San Marino to ensure the adoption there of equivalent measures to allow effective taxation of savings income paid to EU residents.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.183" usage="ewyb edio casee">In May 1993 ministers adopted a directive on investment services, which (with effect from 1 January 1996) allowed credit institutions to offer investment services in any member state, on the basis of a licence held in one state. A Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFiD), which entered into force in November 2007, allowed investment firms to operate throughout the EU on the basis of authorization in their home member state, and ensured that investors benefited from a high level of protection when employing such firms, regardless of their location in the EU. In June 2014 the European Commission adopted proposals for MiFiD II, comprising a revised directive, and a new regulation, with the aim of further protecting investors, and to take into account the evolution of new methods of trading. MiFiD II, originally envisaged for implementation in 2017, was applicable throughout the EU from January 2018.</p>
                    <p>The Capital Requirements Directive (CRD), which was adopted in June 2006, provided for the introduction of a supervisory framework on capital measurement and capital standards in accordance with the Basel II rules agreed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. In September 2009 a revised CRD was adopted by the European Parliament (EP) and the Council, amending the rules on bank capital requirements. This aimed to foster improved risk management among financial institutions, strengthened the regulatory framework in areas relevant to the causes of the financial and economic crisis in the eurozone, and had to be transposed into national law by the end of October 2010. Meanwhile, in June 2009 the European Council had recommended the establishment of a so-called single rulebook to apply to all financial institutions in the single market. In December 2010 the Basel Committee put forward new regulatory standards on the adequacy and liquidity of bank capital, which were collectively known as Basel III. The CRD was divided into two legislative instruments: a directive governing access to deposit-taking activities, and a regulation establishing the requirements to be adhered to by institutions (together known as CRD IV). Basel III entered into force in mid-July 2013.</p>
                    <p>In September 2003 the occupational pensions directive (IORP directive), designed to allow workers of multinational companies to access cross-border employer pension schemes, became EU law. In July 2007 the Commission proposed a reform of EU insurance legislation, to improve consumer protection and supervision, deepen market integration and increase international competitiveness. The new system, known as Solvency I, introduced more extensive solvency requirements for insurers, in order to guarantee sufficient capital to withstand adverse events, covering not only traditional insurance risks, but also economic risks, including market risk (such as a decline in the value of an insurer’s investments), credit risk (for example when debt obligations are not met) and operational risk (such as malpractice or system failure). Solvency II (replacing 14 existing directives), was adopted in May 2009, and the new system entered into force in January 2016. The provisions of a revised occupational pensions directive, IORP II, had to be incorporated into national law by January 2019. The European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Committee works to improve co-operation with national supervisory authorities.</p>
                    <p>A Payment Services Directive (PSD), adopted in November 2007, provided the legal framework for the creation of the Single Euro Payments Area, an initiative designed to make all electronic payments across the EU and EEA as straightforward and secure as domestic payments within individual member states. From April 2011 the Electronic Money (e-money) Directive was applied, with the aim of regulating the business and supervision of relevant financial institutions to support the evolution of the single market for digital e-money services throughout the EU, while maintaining consistency with the PSD. In October 2015 a new directive on payment services, known as PSD2, was adopted, repealing the first PSD with effect from January 2018; PSD2 sought to increase security, benefit consumers and take into account developments in innovation.</p>
                    <p>
          In September 2009 the Commission adopted proposals for the creation of a European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), which was to monitor and assess risks to the stability of the financial system as a whole; and a European System of Financial Supervisors (ESFS), with the capacity to address recommendations and warnings issued to member states and to the European supervisory authorities. The ESFS comprised three European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs): a Euro­pean Banking Authority; a European Securities and Markets Authority; and a European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, to help rebuild confidence, unify financial rules, resolve problems involving cross-border firms, and prevent the accumulation of risks that could undermine the stability of the financial system. In September 2010 the EP endorsed the new supervisory framework, which was confirmed by ministers responsible for the economy and for finance (the ECOFIN Council) in November. The three ESAs and the ESRB were established in January 2011 to replace the supervisory committees hitherto in place. In December 2012 EU ministers responsible for finance approved plans to deepen and safeguard economic stability through the creation of a banking union (see 
          <i>Economic Co-operation</i>
          ). A Bank Resolution and Recovery Directive (BRRD) was adopted, introducing harmonized procedures for the management of insolvent financial institutions. Member states were required to implement the Directive by the end of 2014 (however, 11 states failed to do so).
        </p>
                    <p>In September 2011 the President of the Commission announced proposals to introduce a new, EU-wide financial transaction tax (FTT), which would apply to transactions between financial institutions, at a rate of 0.1% on equity and debt transactions, and 0.01% on derivatives transactions. Two-thirds of revenue from the FTT was to be directed to the EU budget, thereby reducing the contributions of member states based on gross national income, while the remaining one-third would be retained by individual member states. However, there was not unanimous support for the FTT, and although in late 2012 the Commission proposed that the principle of `enhanced co-operation’ should be utilized (a procedure permitting a minimum of nine member states to introduce ameliorated co-operation in certain areas) so that the tax could be introduced in the 11 states in favour, FTT has not yet come into force.</p>
                    <p>
          In March 2013 the Council and the EP approved legislation restricting bonus payments payable to those working in the banking sector to no more than the sum of an employee’s total annual salary from 2014; the one-to-one ratio could be increased twofold, dependent on the approval of a majority of shareholders. The 
          
          EP also voted in favour of the imposition of an upper limit on bonus payments to fund managers. The rules came into force in February 2015.
        </p>
                    <p>
          In May 2014 the European Commission published an initial comprehensive review of its financial regulation framework, following the proposal of more than 40 reform measures in the wake of the economic and financial crisis in the eurozone. In November 2016 the Commission proposed a number of amendments to the CRD, as part of a package of legislative measures that also sought to amend the Capital Requirements Regulation, the BRRD and the Single Resolution Mechanism Regulation (see 
          <i>Economic Co-operation</i>
          ), in order to address structural weaknesses and further bolster the European economy.
        </p>
                    <p>
          In September 2015 the Commission adopted a plan identifying measures to be implemented in order to introduce a Capital Markets Union (CMU), in an effort further to integrate capital markets and increase the resilience of the financial system. In response to the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, in July 2020 the Commission adopted a capital markets recovery package. In September the Commission adopted a new CMU action plan, comprising three principal objectives: supporting a sustainable, digital and resilient economic recovery by facilitating access to financing for EU companies; enhancing the security of the savings and investments of individuals throughout the EU; and integrating the national capital markets of EU member states within the single market. In February 2021, as part of the recovery package, the Council adopted an initial series of measures to help companies to access funding, including through targeted amendments to MiFiD II, to facilitate the recapitalization of businesses on financial markets. Effort to develop a CMU had also been adversely impacted by the loss of the UK’s financial sector from the bloc as a result of Brexit, which had led to increased fragmentation of the EU’s capital markets. Planned reforms published by the Commission in November 2021 included proposals to introduce a new European Single Access Point, as part of the EU’s digital finance strategy (adopted in September 2020), to provide free and transparent information about companies, their sustainability and investment opportunities—of benefit, in particular, to smaller companies in smaller capital markets. There were plans to review European Long-Term Investment Funds (ELTIF) to make them more accessible, in particular by removing a minimum investment threshold of €10,000. Provisional agreement on the ELTIF was reached in October 2022
          
           . The Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive was also to be reformed, along with a review of MiFiD II to introduce a so-called European consolidated `tape’, to facilitate wider access to trading data by providing a close to real-time record of prices and transactions across the EU.
        </p>
                    <p>
          In July 2021 the Commission presented proposals for legislation to reinforce the EU’s existing rules on anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT). The Commission proposed establishing an AML Authority (AMLA) to combat money laundering, improve detection and prevent terrorist activities being funded through the financial system; agreement to establish the AMLA was reached in December 2023 and in February 2024 Frankfurt am Main, Germany was announced as AMLA’s location. Provisional agreement between the Council and the EP on anti-money laundering legislation was reached in January 2024, including new rules for the cryptocurrency sector and extending reporting rules to other sectors, e.g. luxury goods traders.
          
                    </p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>