<int-org-sectref id="SL1112092" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112091" slsdocid="1103334" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.284" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Security and Defence</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.162" usage="ewyb edio casee">Under the Single European Act, which came into force on 1 July 1987 (amending the Treaty of Rome, now the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union), it was formally stipu­lated that member states should inform and consult each other on foreign policy matters (as was already, in practice, often the case). In June 1992 the Petersberg Declaration of Western European Union (WEU) defined the role of WEU as the defence component of the EU and outlined the `Petersberg tasks’ relating to crisis management, including hu­man­itarian, peacekeeping and peacemaking operations, which could be carried out under WEU authority (now EU authority). In 1992 France and Germany established a joint force, Eurocorps, based in Strasbourg, France, which was later joined by Belgium, Spain and Luxembourg. An agreement signed in January 1993 specified that Eurocorps troops could serve under the command of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), thus relieving any concerns that the Eurocorps would undermine NATO’s role in Europe. The Maastricht Treaty on European Union, which came into force on 1 November, provided for joint action by member governments in matters of common foreign and security policy (CFSP), and envisaged the formation of a European security and defence policy (ESDP), with the possibility of a common defence force, although existing commitments to NATO were to be honoured. In May 1995 WEU ratified the decision by Spain, France, Italy and Portugal to establish land and sea forces, the European Operational Rapid Force and the European Maritime Force, respectively, which were also to undertake the Petersberg tasks under the auspices of WEU. At an EU summit in Cologne, Germany, in June 1999, EU member states accepted a proposal for the Eurocorps to be placed at the disposal of the EU for crisis response operations. In 2002 the Eurocorps was transformed into a rapid reaction corps. Six countries are Eurocorps member states: Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Poland and Spain. There are five associated states: Austria, Greece, Italy, Romania and Türkiye (known as Turkey until mid-2022).</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.164" usage="ewyb edio casee">The Treaty of Amsterdam, which entered into force in May 1999, aimed to strengthen the concept of a CFSP within the Union and incorporated a process of common strategies to co-ordinate external relations with a third party. The so-called Petersberg tasks were absorbed into Article 17 of the Treaty on European Union by means of the Treaty of Amsterdam. The Treaty introduced the role of High Representative for the CFSP. In June the European Council determined to strengthen the ESDP, stating that the EU needed a capacity for autonomous action, without prejudice to actions by NATO and acknowledging the supreme prerogatives of the UN Security Council. In December, following consultation with NATO, the European Council adopted the European Defence Initiative, which stated that by 2003 the EU should be able to deploy a rapid reaction force within 60 days and for a period of up to one year; the force was to comprise up to 60,000 national troops from member states. The establishment of three permanent military institutions was proposed: a Political and Security Committee (PSC); a Military Committee; and a Military Staff. The PSC, which was fully established by 2001, monitors the international situation, helps to define policies and assess their implementation, encourages dialogue and, under the auspices of the Council, takes responsibility for the political direction of capability development. In the event of a crisis situation, it oversees the strategic direction of any military response, proposes political objectives and supervises their enactment. The Military Committee gives military advice to the PSC, and comprises the chiefs of defence of member states, represented by military delegates. It serves as a forum for military consultation and co-operation and deals with risk assessment, the development of crisis management and military relations with non-EU European NATO members, accession countries and NATO. Meanwhile, the Military Staff, comprising experts seconded by the member states, provides the EU with an early warning capability, is responsible for strategic planning and implements the Military Committee’s policies. Permanent arrangements have been agreed for EU-NATO consultation and co-operation in this area. The crisis management responsibilities of WEU were transferred to the EU by July 2001.</p>
                    <p>The Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), as the ESDP was renamed, remained an integral part of the CFSP under the Treaty of Lisbon, which entered into force in December 2009, becoming the new legal basis for the CFSP. A mutual defence clause and a solidarity clause (in the event of a member state becoming the victim of a terrorist attack or natural or manmade disaster) were included, and joint disarmament operations, military advice and assistance, conflict prevention and post-conflict stabilization were added to the Petersberg tasks. The Lisbon Treaty introduced the office of High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and provided for the establishment of the European External Action Service. Most decisions on the CFSP continued to be adopted at intergovernmental level and by consensus of all member states. With the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon, all functions of WEU were incorporated into the EU, and WEU ceased to function in 2011.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.165" usage="ewyb edio casee">In June 2004 the European Council approved the creation of a European Defence Agency (EDA), which commenced operations later that year. The EDA took responsibility for improving the EU’s defence capabilities in relation to crisis management and for promoting co-operation on research and procurement, strengthening the defence industrial and technological base and developing a competitive European defence equipment market.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.168" usage="ewyb edio casee">In June 2000 the EU established a civilian crisis management committee, and in February 2001 a regulation was adopted that created a rapid reaction mechanism (RRM) to improve the EU’s civilian crisis response capacity. In March 2014 an Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace (IcSP), with a focus on initiatives contributing to stability in partner countries, was adopted (superseding an Instrument for Stability established in 2006). The European External Action Service (EEAS) was created under the Lisbon Treaty, and its Crisis Response and Operational Coordination Department has responsibility for activating the Service’s Crisis Response System (comprising a crisis platform, EU situation room and crisis management board).</p>
                    <p usage="edio casee">In November 2004 EU ministers responsible for defence agreed to create several Battlegroups (BGs) for eventual deployment to crisis areas. BGs were to comprise up to 1,500 troops and were to be capable of deployment within 10 days of a unanimous decision from EU member states and the creation of a battle plan, and would be equipped to stay in an area for up to four months. Each group was to be commanded by a `lead nation’ and associated with a force headquarters. The BGs reached initial operational capacity in January 2005, so that at least one was on standby every six months. In January 2007 the BGs reached full operational capacity, meaning that two BG operations could be undertaken concurrently; however, no BG deployments have taken place.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.169" usage="ewyb edio casee">Under the European code of conduct on arms exports, the EU publishes an annual report on defence exports based on confidential information provided by each member state. EU member states must withhold export licences to countries where it is deemed that arms sales might lead to political repression or external aggression. The EU funds projects aimed at the collection and destruction of weapons in countries emerging from conflict. The EU is committed to nuclear non-proliferation.</p>
                    <p usage="casee">In September 2004 five European ministers responsible for defence signed an agreement in Noordwijk, Netherlands, to establish a police force, which could be deployed internationally for post-conflict peacekeeping duties and maintaining public order. The European Gendarmerie Force, which was officially inaugurated at its headquarters in Vicenza, Italy, in January 2006, was capable of deploying a mission of up to 800 gendarmes within 30 days, which could be reinforced.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.2039" usage="edio casee">In September 2001, following terrorist attacks in the USA, the Justice and Home Affairs Council decided that, for the perpetrators of terrorist attacks (as commonly defined), as well as those involved in other serious crimes (including trafficking and money laundering), the process of extradition would be replaced by a procedure for handover based on a European arrest warrant. The member states reached agreement on the arrest warrant in December; under the agreement, covering 32 serious offences, EU countries may not refuse to extradite their own nationals. The European arrest warrant had been implemented in all member states by 2005. The Council also determined to accelerate the implementation of the convention on mutual assistance in criminal matters and to establish a joint investigation team. Member states were encouraged to ratify the convention on combating the financing of terrorism and to exercise greater rigour in the issuing of travel documents.</p>
                    <p>The heads of the security and intelligence services of member states met in October 2001, to discuss the co-ordinated action to be taken to curb terrorism. In December EUROPOL signed a co-operation agreement on the exchange of strategic information (excluding personal data) with the USA; in December 2002 the agreement was extended to include the exchange of personal data. Terrorist bombings in Madrid, Spain, in March 2004 gave impetus to EU initiatives aimed at improving travel document security and impeding the cross-border movements of terrorists. Following the attacks, the EU created the position of Counter-terrorist Co-ordinator, to enhance intelligence sharing among EU members and to promote the implementation of agreed EU anti-terrorism measures. The Justice and Home Affairs Council held an extraordinary meeting following terrorist attacks in London, UK, in July 2005, at which ministers pledged to accelerate the adoption and implementation of enhanced counter-terrorism measures. In December the Council adopted a new EU counter-terrorism strategy. A specific strategy for combating radical Islamism and the recruitment of terrorists was approved at the same time. A directive on the retention of telecommunications data for up to two years for use in anti-terrorism investigations was approved by the European Parliament (EP) later in December.</p>
                    <p>Terrorist attacks in Paris, France, in January 2015 focused attention on EU-wide security and counter-terrorism strategies. Fatal attacks in Copenhagen, Denmark, in the following month increased concerns about radicalization and the issue of EU-born Islamists returning to EU member states after fighting with militant groups such as the extremist Islamic State (IS, formerly known as Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant). In December 2014 Federica Mogherini, Commission Vice-President and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, attended the first meeting of the Global Coalition to Counter the IS, which was held in Brussels. In April 2015 the European Commission adopted a European Agenda on Security (EAS) for 2015–20, in an effort to facilitate increased co-operation between EU member states in combating terrorism, organized crime and cyber crime. In November 2015 further attacks linked to IS took place in Paris, killing some 130 people. In December the Commission adopted a number of proposals to strengthen the EU’s capabilities in combating terrorism and arms trafficking. The proposals comprised two principal elements: a Directive on Terrorism, to strengthen the EU’s ability to prevent terrorist attacks by criminalizing so-called preparatory acts, such as travel overseas for the purposes of terrorism; and an Action Plan to tighten controls on the illegal possession, purchase and import of weapons into the EU. Further terrorist attacks linked to supporters of IS took place in several European cities from 2016.</p>
                    <p>
          In June 2016 Mogherini presented a new Global Strategy for the EU’s foreign and security policy, and an EU Global Strategy Implementation Plan on Security and Defence was presented to member state ministers responsible for foreign affairs and defence in November. The ministers agreed on enhanced co-operation in security and defence, focusing on three key areas: enabling the EU to respond to conflict and crises by accelerating the implementation and efficacy of both civilian and military operations; strengthening the response of partner countries, including through the provision of training programmes; and strengthening the EU’s internal capacity to protect its citizens while tackling the root cause of threats to security, by combating, for example, terrorism, and the trafficking of both people and drugs. In November the Commission proposed a new European Defence Action Plan (EDAP) providing, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , for the establishment of a European Defence Fund to facilitate investment in the research and development of collaborative defence projects; the European Defence Fund was launched in June 2017, with an annual budget of €5,500m. In December the Council of the EU and ministers responsible for foreign affairs of NATO countries adopted a common set of proposals for increased EU-NATO co-operation. This followed the signature of a joint declaration by EU leaders and the NATO Secretary-General in July, which had identified seven areas of co-operation: responding to hybrid threats; co-operation in operational matters, including marine and migration issues; cyber security; defence capability; defence industry and research; joint exercises; and capacity building.
        </p>
                    <p>
          At a summit meeting in Bratislava, Slovakia, in September 2016, EU leaders agreed to deepen co-operation in security and defence. In December the European Council adopted conclusions endorsing an implementation plan for the development of security and defence policy, building on the EU’s Global Strategy. The European Council also supported the Commission’s proposal for the EDAP; and urged a rapid expansion in EU-NATO co-operation. The implementation plan identified three priorities: the response to external conflict and crises; the development of the capabilities of EU partners; and the protection of EU citizens. These objectives were to be achieved by, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , establishing a co-ordinated annual review on defence (CARD) to improve the transparency of EU defence capabilities, and to monitor defence spending, investment and research; developing a permanent structured co-operation (PESCO), as provided for by the Treaty of Lisbon, to strengthen European security and defence; establishing military planning and conduct capability (MPCC) to improve crisis management; and strengthening the EU’s rapid response tools. In June 2017 EU leaders agreed to launch the PESCO, and in mid-December the Council adopted a decision on its establishment. All EU member states have committed themselves to taking part in the PESCO, with the exception of Malta (Denmark was confirmed as a PESCO participating country in May 2023, after voters in the country ended its opt-out on EU defence co-operation in a referendum in 2022). In November 2020 the Council approved guidance for the second initial phase of PESCO, for implementation during 2021–25.
        </p>
                    <p>In July 2020 the Commission proposed a new EU Security Union Strategy for 2020–25. Actions were to apply in three principal areas: combating organized crime and human trafficking; introducing a new counter-terrorism agenda, together with efforts to prevent radicalization; and countering cybercrime, including the sexual abuse of children. The new strategy superseded the EAS for 2015–20.</p>
                    <p>
          In March 2021 EU ministers of foreign affairs agreed to establish a new, extra-budgetary European Peace Facility (EPF), which was intended to improve the EU’s ability to prevent conflict and strengthen international security by providing a single instrument to finance operational decisions relating to military and defence under the CFSP. It replaced and expanded on two former financial instruments, the Athena Mechanism and the African Peace Facility. The EPF enables the EU both to train and equip its partners with military supplies in order to increase their defence capabilities, and was worth €5,000m. in 2018 prices during 2021–27 (the EPF’s financial ceiling was increased to some €17,000m., in current prices, in 2024)
          
                         
           . In late February 2022 the EU announced that it was to provide funds of some €450m. to Ukraine under the EPF, following its large-scale military invasion by the Russian Federation; the EU subsequently pledged significant additional funding and in March 2024 established a Ukraine Assistance Fund within the EPF, ringfencing €5,000m. for Ukraine (in current prices)
          
          .
        </p>
                    
                    <p>In March 2022 the EU adopted a new Strategic Compass to strengthen EU defence and security policy by 2030, enabling member states to respond more rapidly to crises; provide security for citizens, amid fast-changing threats; invest in military capabilities and technologies; and co-operate with other EU members to achieve common objectives. In July the Commission adopted a proposal to reinforce European defence capabilities by facilitating common procurement in 2022–24, through the establishment of a short-term EU instrument with funding of some €500m. to address `the most urgent and critical needs’ for defence products, following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.</p>
                    <p>
          A Commission-High Representative joint communication on an enhanced EU Maritime Security Strategy (EUMSS) was adopted in March 2023, with the aim of ensuring maritime peace and security, including, 
          <i>inter alia, </i>
          the organization of naval exercises at EU level; increased EU-NATO co-operation; and the reinforcement of surveillance by coastal patrol vessels. A revised strategy was approved by the Council in October.
        </p>
                    <p>
          Provisional agreement between the EP and the Council was reached in July 2023 on an act to boost ammunition and missile production in the EU, the Act in Support of Ammunition Production, with funding of €500m. over two years. In October a new instrument was adopted by the Council on the reinforcement of the European defence industry through common procurement (EDIRPA), whereby funds from the EU budget could be used partially to reimburse member states, where three or more member states were involved in a consortium for joint defence purchases
          
           . The Commission and the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, in co-ordination with the European Defence Agency, put forward the first European Defence Industrial Strategy in March 2024, a long-term plan to support the readiness and competitiveness of the European defence industry.
        </p>
                    <p usage="edio casee">In October 2012 the EU was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, in acknowledgement of its contribution to `the advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy and human rights in Europe’ after the two World Wars of the 20th century.</p>
                    <p usage="casee ewyb edio">The EU has established a number of military operations in third countries.</p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>