<int-org-sectref id="SL1112080" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112079" slsdocid="1103327" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.282" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Health, Food Safety and Consumer Protection</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.148" usage="ewyb edio">The EU is committed to ensuring that health protection is incorporated into its policies, and to working to improve public health, prevent illness and remove dangers to both physical and mental health. In response to the challenges presented by the COVID-19 pandemic from early 2020, the EU agreed a new health programme for 2021–27. EU4Health was launched in March 2021 with funding of €2,446m. (in current prices); it aims to provide funds to EU member states, health organizations and non-governmental organizations in order to invest in preventative measures, crisis preparedness, the acquisition of essential medicines and medical supplies, and efforts to improve long-term health. Two major projects were launched under EU4Health in February 2024, with funding of €126m., the first on antimicrobial resistance and the second on the prevention of cancer and other non-communicable diseases.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.149" usage="ewyb edio casee">An Early Warning and Response System to help member states to deal with outbreaks of disease was in place by the end of 2000. A European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) became operational in May 2005, in Stockholm, Sweden, which enables the EU to share its disease control expertise more effectively and allows multinational investigation teams to be drawn up effectively. The first European conference on vaccination and immunization, Eurovaccine 2009, was organized and funded by the ECDC, and convened in Sweden in December 2009. Meanwhile, in 2006–08 the EU member states, and Iceland and Norway, began to implement the Vaccine European New Integrated Collaboration Effort (VENICE) project, which aimed to broaden knowledge and best practice on vaccination.</p>
                    <p>In response to the COVID-19 outbreak, from late January 2020 the EU’s integrated political crisis response mechanism (IPCR) was activated, in order to ensure information was shared between countries. In June the Commission launched a new European vaccine strategy for the development, manufacture and distribution of vaccines to protect against COVID-19. The Commission utilized emergency funds to seek vaccine supplies for EU member states through advance purchase agreements with prospective vaccine manufacturers. Vaccination against COVID-19 began throughout the EU in late December. Under the terms of a new temporary transparency and authorization mechanism, between 30 January and 30 June 2021 pharmaceuticals suppliers based in EU member states were required to request authorization before exporting either COVID-19 vaccines or their active ingredients (excluding arrangements under the COVAX facility—a global initiative that aimed to provide fair and equitable access to COVID-19 vaccines for those in low and middle-income countries). By the end of 2021 five vaccines had been approved by the EU’s medical regulator.</p>
                    <p>In November 2020 the Commission initiated measures towards the creation of new European Health Union. The Commission proposed bolstering the EU’s health security framework and adopting a new regulation on serious cross-border threats to health. The improved health security framework would improve readiness at both the EU and national levels to deal with new threats to health, to improve data reporting on indicators relating to health systems (for example, information about the availability of hospital beds or about intensive care capacity), and to strengthen health surveillance, with the use of advanced technologies. Moreover, the mandates of both the ECDC and the European Medicines Agency were to be strengthened to enable them to provide increased support to both the Commission and to member states. A Health Emergency Preparedness and Response Authority (HERA) was established in 2021.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">
          A European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction was established in Lisbon, Portugal, in 1995. In July 2005 an EU directive came into effect that prohibited tobacco advertising with a cross-border dimension via print media, radio and the internet, as well as the sponsorship by tobacco companies of cross-border cultural and sporting events. Tobacco advertising on television had already been banned in the EU in the early 1990s. In June 2009 the Commission adopted a proposal for a Council recommendation on the introduction of national legislation to protect citizens from exposure to tobacco smoke. A Tobacco Products Directive, which was applied from May 2016, prohibited, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , the use of tobacco products with a so-called characterizing flavour (such as menthol), provided for mandatory, larger pictorial health warnings on packaging, prohibited packets of fewer than 20 cigarettes and introduced measures to regulate e-cigarettes.
        </p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">The Food Supplements Directive, which was approved in 2002 and was designed to strengthen controls on the sale of natural remedies, vitamin supplements and mineral plant extracts, came into effect in August 2005. A Falsified Medicines Directive came into force in January 2013, which improved the safety of medicines through measures to ensure their authenticity and the quality of their ingredients.</p>
                    <p>Since January 2006 EU member states have issued European Health Insurance Cards, which entitle residents to receive state-provided medical treatment while visiting states within the EU, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, Switzerland and the UK.</p>
                    
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.145" usage="ewyb edio">The European Food Safety Authority provides the Commission with scientific advice on food safety, and has been based in Parma, Italy, since June 2005. In July 1998 an Institute for Health and Consumer Protection, attached to the Commission’s Joint Research Centre, was established. The Commission’s Directorate-General for Health and Food Safety (DG SANTE) aims to improve and protect health, and to help modernize EU health systems; to ensure the safety of food, animal feed and pharmaceutical products throughout the EU, while ensuring an effective and fair internal market for those products; to help to disseminate EU standards worldwide; and to protect the health and welfare of both animals and plants.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.146" usage="ewyb edio">In July 2001 the Commission developed rules on the labelling and tracing of genetically modified organisms (GMOs). A proposal by the Commission in mid-2010, to introduce voluntary national cultivation bans for GMOs, was approved by the Council in June 2014, formally permitting EU countries to opt out from the EU’s GMO crop approval system. By October 2015 19 EU countries had reportedly expressed a preference not to cultivate genetically modified crops within all or some part of their territory.</p>
                    <p>
          It emerged in early 2013 that unregulated horsemeat had been used in processed meat products widely supplied throughout Europe. In March the European Commissioner, responsible for Health Policy, announced a five-point plan which identified actions to be implemented over the short, medium and longer term in order to rectify shortcomings in the EU’s food supply chain. In May the Commission proposed new legislation to update and strengthen the agri-food chain, in an effort to improve food safety. In July the EU Food Fraud Network (FFN) was launched, comprising contact points in each of the EU member states, as well as Iceland, Norway and Switzerland
          
          , to provide cross-border administrative support and co-operation on issues pertaining to financially motivated violations of legislation on food. In December 2014 new EU food labelling rules came into force, which sought to ensure that consumers received comprehensive and accurate information about the origin and content of food products, and to make clear the presence of potential allergens. Legislation compelling manufacturers to present clear nutritional information came into effect in December 2016.
        </p>
                    <p>A Community Register of Feed Additives (now European Union Register of Feed Additives) was published in November 2005, in accordance with a regulation on additives for use in animal nutrition. A regulation requiring that all health claims on food, drinks or food supplements be substantiated by independent experts was adopted in December 2006. In June 2017 the European Commission adopted an action plan to address the problems posed by increased antimicrobial resistance, which was understood to be causing annually more than 33,000 human fatalities in the EU. In February 2016 the European Parliament (EP) adopted legislation limiting antibiotic use in agriculture to the treatment of sick livestock and to the prevention of the spread of infection.</p>
                    <p-alternates default="EDIO" type="ALTERNATES">
                         <p usage="edio">The first case of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), a transmissible disease that causes the brain tissue to degenerate, was diagnosed in cattle in the UK in 1986. The use of meat and bone meal in animal feed was identified as a possible cause of the emergence of the disease and was banned throughout the EU from 1994 for ruminants and in December 2000 for all animals. The possible link between BSE and new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD), a degenerative brain disease affecting humans, resulted in a complete ban on the use for any purpose of `specified risk materials’ (i.e. those parts and organs most likely to carry the BSE prion disease agent) from cattle, sheep and goats from January 1999. A regulation on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) came into force in July 2001, replacing previous emergency legislation and clarifying rules for the prevention, control and eradication of TSEs. Each year the Commission approves programmes aimed at monitoring, controlling and eradicating animal diseases, with a special focus on those transmissible from animal carriers to humans.</p>
                         <p usage="ewyb">A regulation on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) came into force in July 2001, replacing previous emergency legislation and clarifying rules for the prevention, control and eradication of TSEs. Each year the Commission approves programmes aimed at monitoring, controlling and eradicating animal diseases, with a special focus on those transmissible from animal carriers to humans.</p>
                    </p-alternates>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.25" usage="ewyb edio">The EU’s Food and Veterinary Office was established in April 1997 to ensure that the laws on food safety, animal health and welfare, and plant health are applied in all member states. Legislation establishing the European Food Safety Authority was signed in January 2002; the body provides independent scientific advice and support on matters with a direct or indirect impact on food safety. It has no regulatory or judicial power, but co-operates closely with similar bodies in the member states.</p>
                    <p>In November 2002 agreement was reached to ban the sale, import and export of virtually all cosmetic products tested after 11 March 2009 on animals in the EU, and to halt from 11 March 2013 all animal testing for cosmetics.</p>
                    <p>Consumer protection is one of the stated priorities of EU policy, and has been implemented via a series of action programmes covering areas such as safety of products and services (e.g. food additives, safety of toys, packaging and labelling of goods), protecting consumers’ economic and legal interests, and promoting consumer representation. A number of measures have been taken to strengthen consumers’ rights, by promoting consumer associations and drawing up a requirement for fair commercial practices.</p>
                    <p>In January 2005 a European Consumer Centres Network (ECC-Net) was established to provide a single point of contact in each member state for consumers to obtain information about their rights and assistance in pursuing complaints, particularly in cases concerning cross-border purchases. In October 2013 the Commission published guidelines for businesses concerning new rules on value-added tax (VAT) for telecommunications and e-services, which came into force in January 2015. Under the new legislation, VAT is charged based on the location of customer, rather than the service provider, as part of efforts to reduce complications relating to cross-border taxation and administration for businesses operating in the single market.</p>
                    <p>In February 2005 the EP approved a new directive to harmonize the framework across the EU for banning unfair commercial practices. The new legislation, which clarified consumers’ rights, banned pressure selling and misleading marketing and facilitated cross-border trade, took effect in December 2007.</p>
                    <p>The Consumer Protection Co-operation Network, comprising public authorities responsible for enforcing legislation to protect the interests of consumers in the event of cross-border disputes, was officially launched in February 2007. In July 2009 the European Commission published a blueprint for a proposed standardized EU-wide method for classifying and reporting consumer complaints. In November 2011 the Commission adopted a directive on Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR), which sought to ensure that all contractual disputes between consumers and providers could be resolved without recourse to the courts. The ADR directive was adopted by the Council in April 2013, for implementation throughout the EU by 2015. A new online dispute resolution platform became active in January 2016, to help both consumers and businesses to settle disputes concerning the online purchase of goods from other EU member countries.</p>
                    <p>In December 2009 the European Commission adopted a new set of Rapid Alert System for Non-Food Consumer Products (known as RAPEX) guidelines. The RAPEX system was inaugurated in 2004 to facilitate the exchange of information between member states of measures taken to restrict or prevent the marketing or use of products deemed to pose a risk to the health and safety of consumers, professionals and public interests. In November 2018 the RAPEX system was updated, and its name was changed to Safety Gate. The Commission publishes a weekly report on recent Safety Gate notifications.</p>
                    <p>Proposals for a new European Consumer Agenda from 2014 were adopted in May 2012. The programme sought to increase the safety of products through market surveillance; improve the information provided to consumers, including awareness of their rights; consolidate consumer rights and strengthen redress, in particular, by means of alternative dispute resolution; and strengthen consumer rights in a number of principal sectors, including telecommunications, the digital sector, energy, transport, food and banking. From December 2018 new legislation came into effect to prevent so-called `geoblocking’ and thereby prevent discrimination against consumers from different countries in terms of access to online goods and services.</p>
                    <p>On 13 November 2020 the Commission adopted a New Consumer Agenda, which provided an updated strategic framework for consumer policy. It was intended to help the EU to deal with new issues relating to consumers and consumer rights introduced by developments in environmental and digital policy, the COVID-19 pandemic and plans for the economic recovery following the COVID-19 crisis.</p>
                    <p>
          In 2021–27 the EU’s new Single Market Programme (see 
          <i>Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises</i>
          ) was to finance activities relating to consumer protection and to the protection and sustainability of the food supply chain, required in order to ensure the efficient operation of the Single Market. In December 2020 the Commission proposed a new Digital Services Act and a Digital Markets Act, which aimed to protect consumers, and their rights, online (see 
          <i>Communications, Content, Technology and the Digital Single Market</i>
          ).
        </p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>