<int-org-sectref id="SL1112046" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112045" slsdocid="1103270" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.277" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Communications, Content, Technology and the Digital Single Market</heading>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">
          In 1991 the Council adopted a directive requiring member states to liber­alize their rules on the supply of tele­communi­ca­tions terminal equipment, thus ending the mono­polies of national telecommu­nications au­thor­ities. Also in 1991 the Television without Frontiers directive came into force, establishing minimum standards for television programmes to be broadcast freely throughout the Community. A directive relating to the liberalization of satellite telecommunications equipment and services came into effect in 1994. In October 1995 and January 1996, respectively, the European Commission adopted directives liberalizing the use of cable telecommunications and opening the EU market for mobile telephone networks to full competition. All the major EU tele­communi­cations markets were, in principle, open to competition from 1998. A comprehensive reform of the regulatory framework for telecommunications was launched in July 2000, with the aim of developing a single regulatory framework for the telecommunications, media and information technology (IT) sectors. In December 2001 the European Parliament (EP) approved legislation that empowered the Commission to oversee national regulatory regimes and, in some cases, to overrule national regulatory authorities. By the end of 2003 the EU regulatory framework for electronic communications had been implemented. Political agreement was reached in December 2023 on a new European Media Freedom Act, originally put forward by the Commission in September 2022, which would create a common framework for the media, 
          <i>inter alia </i>
          protecting providers from political interference.
        </p>
                    <p>In May 2005 the Commission set a target of 2012 for completing the transition from analogue to digital broadcasting. The Audiovisual Media Services without Frontiers directive was adopted by the EP in November 2007, with legislation to be implemented by member states by December 2009. In March 2010 the Audiovisual Media Services Directive (AVMSD) was adopted, with the aim of implementing a cross-border framework. A review of the AVMSD was completed in November 2018, and a revised directive was adopted, to take into account the evolution of video-sharing technology and social media.</p>
                    <p>
          In March 2010 the European Commission launched the Europe 2020 strategy, which established the Digital Agenda for Europe; it sought to promote innovation and economic growth through the creation of a Digital Single Market. The Commission identified seven principal objectives for the Digital Agenda, including the creation of a single, online market; improved standards and interoperability for ICT; improved access to fast internet speeds; research and innovation; digital literacy; and the use of ICT to address important societal issues. The Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) was to invest, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , in Digital Service Infrastructures and broadband projects. In March 2015 the Commission agreed priorities for the development of the new Digital Single Market, comprising 16 specific initiatives, built around three themes: improved access to digital goods and services across Europe, for both consumers and commercial enterprises; the development of an infrastructural environment conducive to the evolution of both digital networks and innovative services; and stimulating potential for growth in the digital economy and society. An annual Digital Progress Report, published by the Commission, evaluates progress in the digital policies of member states.
        </p>
                    <p>In February 2020 the Commission published its digital strategy for 2020–25, focusing on: technology that works for people; a fair and competitive economy; and an open, democratic and sustainable society. The EU aimed to create a single market for data to improve the EU’s global competitiveness and to facilitate innovation, by means of a new European Data Strategy. For the period 2021–27 the CEF was allocated funding of some €2,000m. for digital projects. In December 2020 the Commission proposed a new Digital Services Act (to help online users feel safe and to ensure accountability for internet service providers) and Digital Markets Act (for equitable, open digital markets), both of which entered into force in 2022. In March 2021 the Commission announced a new 2030 Digital Compass, which set out the EU’s digital objectives until 2030. In December 2023 the EP and the Council reached political agreement on legislation (the AI Act), which had been proposed by the Commission in 2021, regulating the use of artificial intelligence.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio">In September 2013 the Commission adopted a legislative proposal for a Connected Continent, providing for the creation of a single market for mobile telephone usage, by introducing new regulations and market incentives to encourage mobile telephone operators to extend their domestic usage plans (for both telephone and mobile internet services) to consumers throughout the EU by 2016. In October 2015 the EP approved the removal of all roaming charges by June 2017, and in February 2017 final agreement was reached on the regulation of wholesale roaming markets, which would allow consumers to `roam like at home’. Also in February new rules were agreed permitting consumers from EU member states to access digital culture and entertainment services online throughout the EU, as part of efforts to modernize EU digital copyright rules under the Digital Single Market strategy, adopted in May 2015. A new copyright regulation and directive for the Digital Single Market were approved by the EP in March.</p>
                    <p>Following public consultations on broadband requirements and a review of the telecommunications framework launched in late 2015, the Commission proposed the introduction of a new European Electronic Communications Code, including simplified regulations to attract investment in high-quality infrastructure throughout the EU, encourage competition, bolster the internal market and strengthen the rights of consumers. The Code was adopted by the EP and the Council in November 2018. A further regulation adopted at the same time revised the mandate of the Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications, and introduced a maximum rate on charges for mobile telephone calls and text messages between member states from mid-2019. The new measures sought to facilitate deployment of the fifth generation of wireless communication systems, 5G, throughout the EU.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio casee">The .eu top-level domain name, aimed at giving individuals, organizations and companies the option of having a pan-European internet identity, was launched in December 2005. In May 2012 the Commission adopted the European Strategy to Make the Internet a Better Place for Children, commonly referred to as Better Internet for Kids. In February 2019 a new Expert Group on Safer Internet for Children was established, which aimed to strengthen co-ordination between member states in protecting children (for example through parental controls and age ratings) from illegal and harmful online content.</p>
                    <p>
          A European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) became fully operational in October 2004. In June 2019 the EU Cybersecurity Act entered into force and ENISA was renamed the EU Agency for Cybersecurity, with a revised mandate. Meanwhile, the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) was adopted in April 2016 and became legally binding in May 2018. The GDPR aimed to ensure improved control of EU residents’ personal data, while rules applying to commercial businesses aimed to reduce bureaucracy to facilitate the Digital Single Market and improve consumer confidence. The regulation was expected significantly to reduce `spam’ (unsolicited) e-mails, by requiring companies worldwide, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , to obtain the consent of individuals in EU member states before contacting them via e-mail, or risk substantial fines. A new directive pertaining to the protection of personal data processed within the context of criminal justice and law enforcement also entered into force in May 2016, for full integration into national law by May 2018. Following the launch of a Commission communication on `A European Strategy for Data’ in February 2020, two pieces of legislation were agreed: the Data Governance Act to regulate data-sharing systems, which entered into force in June 2022 (to be applicable from September 2023); and the Data Act to regulate the use of and fair access to data, which 
          
          entered into force in January 2024 and was to become applicable in September 2025.
        </p>
                    <p>Reformed telecommunications rules were fully applicable from June 2011, reinforcing competition between operators; promoting investment in new communication infrastructure; and making communication networks more reliable and secure. The Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications was inaug­urated in January 2010. A Network and Information Security Directive was approved by the Parliament and the Council in December 2015, outlining legal measures to improve online security.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio">The MEDIA programme was introduced in 1991 to provide financial support to the television and film industry A new programme, Creative Europe, superseded the MEDIA and Culture programmes, with a budget of some €2,400m. for 2021–27.</p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>