<int-org-sectref id="SL1112057" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112056" slsdocid="1103274" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.278" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Transport</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.89" usage="edio casee">The establishment of a common transport policy was stipulated in the Treaty of Rome (renamed the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union in 2009), with the aim of gradually standardizing national regulations hindering the free movement of traffic, such as the varying safety and licensing rules, diverse restrictions on the size of lorries, and frontier-crossing formalities. A 1992 White Paper setting out an EU-wide common transport policy proposed the establishment of trans-European networks to improve transport, telecommunications and energy connectivity, as well as measures aimed at protecting the environment and enhancing safety.</p>
                    <p>In March 2011 the Commission published a new White Paper on Transport Policy for a Single European Transport Area, which aimed to create a competitive and environmentally efficient transport system by 2050. The Commission detailed 40 separate initiatives for the next decade with the objective of building a competitive transport system to increase mobility; removing barriers; and aiding economic growth and employment. The proposals sought to reduce Europe’s dependence on imported petroleum and to reduce carbon emissions in the transport sector by 60% by 2050. Principal goals for fulfilment by 2050 included removing conventionally fuelled cars from cities; ensuring that 40% of aviation fuels used were sustainable, low-carbon fuels; and reducing shipping emissions by at least 40%.</p>
                    <p>In November 2013 the European Parliament (EP) approved the EU’s new infrastructure policy, with the introduction of the Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) for the fields of transport, energy and digital technologies. The CEF aimed to create a core transport network by 2030, which was to comprise nine principal corridors: two running North–South; three running East–West; and four running diagonally. Related projects included the SESAR programme (see below) and the European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS—see below). The CEF was allocated €11,384m. for transport in 2021–27 (in 2018 prices), with some €1,400m. made available for the improvement of cross-border railway links between countries eligible for cohesion funding.</p>
                    <p>The overall aim of the EU’s trans-European transport network (TEN-T) policy, which included so-called intelligent transport systems and services, was to unite the various national networks into a single European network, by eliminating bottlenecks and adding missing links. In January 2014 the TEN-T was relaunched as part of the EU’s new transport infrastructure policy, and a new Innovation and Networks Executive Agency (INEA) commenced operations in Brussels, managing major funding programmes relating to transport, energy and digital policy. A new European Climate, Infrastructure and Environment Executive Agency was established to replace INEA in February 2021. </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.93" usage="edio">In 1991 directives were adopted by the Council on the compulsory use of safety belts in vehicles weighing less than 3.5 metric tons. Regulations applying to minibuses and coaches were introduced in 1996. In November 2002 the Euro­pean Parliament adopted a directive on speed limitation devices for certain categories of motor vehicles, including haulage vehicles and passenger vehicles carrying more than eight passengers. A regulation reducing maximum driving times and increasing obligatory rest periods for professional drivers and a directive increasing the number of checks on lorries entered into force in April 2007.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.94" usage="ewyb edio casee">In 1992 ministers responsible for transport approved an `open skies’ arrangement that would allow any European Community airline to operate domestic flights within another member state (with effect from April 1997). An EU-US aviation open skies agreement to create a common aviation area, encompassing some 60% of global air traffic, was formally signed with the USA in April and provisionally applied from 30 March 2008; the agreement was amended in June 2010, and applied to Norway and Iceland from June 2011.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.95" usage="ewyb edio casee">In October 2001 the Commission proposed common rules for civil aviation security, to strengthen public confidence in air transport following terrorist attacks in the USA in the previous month. Issues addressed included securing cockpits, improving air-to-ground communications and using video cameras in aircraft. Member states also agreed to incorporate into law co-operation arrangements on security measures, including control of access to sensitive areas of airports and aircraft, control of passengers and hand luggage, control and monitoring of hold luggage, and training of ground staff. In response to the threat posed to civil aviation security by liquid explosives, in October 2006 the Commission adopted a regulation, which applied to all flights departing from member states’ airports, restricting the liquids that passengers were allowed to carry beyond certain screening points at airports. </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.97" usage="ewyb edio casee">In July 2002 the EP adopted a regulation creating a European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA). The EASA (which officially opened its permanent seat in Cologne, Germany, in December 2004) covered all aircraft registered in member states, unless agreed otherwise. In April 2008 a regulation entered into force extending the responsibilities of the EASA, particularly regarding control over pilots’ licences and the regulation of airlines based in third countries operating in the EU. Meanwhile, in December 2005 EU ministers responsible for transport approved a regulation introducing the EU Safety List of airlines that had been refused permission to operate in Europe, and granting passengers the right to advance information about the identity of the air carrier operating their flight.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.98" usage="ewyb edio casee">In December 1999 the Commission presented a communication on streamlining air traffic management (ATM) to create a Single European Sky (SES), of which the overall aim was to restructure the EU’s airspace on the basis of traffic, rather than national frontiers. In December 2002 EU ministers responsible for transport agreed on a package of measures under which the separate European ATM providers would be regulated as a single entity, and EU airspace over 28,500 ft (approximately 8,690 m) would be under unified control. A first package of SES legislation (SES I), bringing ATM under the common transport policy, was adopted in April 2004. In November 2005 the European Commission launched SESAR, a Single Euro­pean Sky industrial and technological programme to develop a new ATM system. In April 2006 a directive was adopted on the introduction of a Community air traffic controller licence. In March 2009 the EP approved a second package of SES legislation (SES II), incorporating improvements aimed at addressing environmental challenges and fuel cost efficiency.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.99" usage="ewyb edio casee">In 1986 progress was made towards the establishment of a common maritime transport policy, with the adoption of regulations on unfair pricing practices, safeguarding of access to cargoes, application of competition rules and the elimination of uni­lateral cargo reservation and discriminatory cargo-sharing arrange­ments. In December 1990 the Council approved, in principle, the freedom for shipping companies to provide maritime transport anywhere within the Community. Cabotage by sea began to be introduced from January 1993 and was virtually complete by January 1999; it was also introduced in the inland waterways transport sector in 1993. By January 2000 the inland waterways market had been liberalized, although differing technical regulations among member states persisted. In October 2007 the European Commission presented a communication on its vision for the Integrated Maritime Policy (IMP), which was endorsed by the Council in December. In November 2011 the Council and the Parliament adopted a regulation providing the legal basis for the IMP.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.100" usage="ewyb edio casee">In March 2000 the Commission adopted a communication on the safety of the seaborne oil trade. In May the Commission adopted a proposal to harmonize procedures between bulk carriers and terminals, in order to reduce the risk of accidents. In the same month the Equasis database, which provides information on the safety and quality of ships, became operational. In August 2002 the European Maritime Safety Agency was established in Lisbon, Portugal. In November 2005 the Commission proposed a new package of maritime safety measures, including a requirement that member states ensure that ships flying their flags comply with international standards; an improvement in the quality and effectiveness of ship inspections; and an obligation that member states designate an independent authority responsible for the prior identification of places of refuge for ships in distress. The Commission noted that the EU accounted for some 25% of the world’s fleet.</p>
                    <p-alternates default="CASEE" type="ALTERNATES">
                         <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.102" usage="edio casee">In April 1998 the Commission published a report on railway policy, with the aim of achieving greater harmonization, the regulation of state subsidies and the progressive liberalization of the rail freight market. In October 1999 EU ministers responsible for transport concluded an agreement that was regarded as a precursor to the full liberalization and revitalization of the rail freight market. This provided for the extension of access to a planned core Trans-European Rail Freight Network (covering some 50,000 km), with a charging system designed to ensure optimum competitiveness. During 2000–04 the EU adopted three `railway packages’, which dealt with the progressive deregulation of the rail market. A European Railway Agency (ERA) opened in Lille/Valenciennes, France, in June 2005, with the aim of reinforcing the safety and interoperability of railways in the EU. In March 2005 the Commission and representatives of the rail industry signed a Memorandum of Understanding on the deployment of the ERTMS single European rail signalling system on a major part of the European network to enhance safety and reduce infrastructure costs; existing national systems were to be withdrawn gradually. Freight services and international passenger services became fully open to competition in member states from, respectively, January 2007 and January 2010. In November 2014 the Commission adopted a regulation that sought to improve access to rail travel for people with disabilities from January 2015.</p>
                         <p usage="ewyb">In October 1999 EU ministers responsible for transport concluded an agreement that was regarded as a precursor to the full liberalization and revitalization of the rail freight market. This provided for the extension of access to a planned core Trans-European Rail Freight Network (covering some 50,000 km), with a charging system designed to ensure optimum competitiveness. During 2000–16 the EU adopted four `railway packages’ on the progressive deregulation and harmonization of the rail market. A European Railway Agency (now the European Union Agency for Railways—ERA) opened in Lille/Valenciennes, France, in June 2005, with the aim of reinforcing the safety and interoperability of railways in the EU. In March 2005 the Commission and representatives of the rail industry signed a Memorandum of Understanding on the deployment of the ERTMS single European rail signalling system on a major part of the European network to enhance safety and reduce infrastructure costs; existing national systems were to be withdrawn gradually. Freight services and international passenger services became fully open to competition in member states from, respectively, January 2007 and January 2010. In November 2014 the Commission adopted a regulation that sought to improve access to rail travel for people with disabilities from January 2015.</p>
                    </p-alternates>
                    <p-alternates default="CASEE" type="ALTERNATES">
                         <p usage="edio casee">
            In January 2013 the Commission adopted proposals on a fourth railway package, which, 
            <i>inter alia</i>
            , proposed transferring substantial administrative responsibility from individual member states to the ERA, in order to help new operators to enter the market and to reduce costs
            
             and proposed that the provision of domestic rail passenger services be opened up to private companies across the EU from December 2019, with the aim of improving quality and choice and increasing passenger rail traffic. The fourth railway package comprises two pillars, relating to technical and market-related issues. The three legislative proposals making up the technical pillar (revising interoperability and safety directives and developing the role of the ERA) were formally agreed in June 2015, and adopted by the EP in April 2016. The three proposals comprising the market pillar (amending directives on opening the market for passenger rail services, the governance of infrastructure and common rules pertaining to accounting) were finally adopted by the Council in October of that year (after modification), and by the Parliament in December. In June 2019 the ERA assumed responsibility for vehicle authorization, safety certification, and ERTMS trackside approval in eight EU member states, with the remainder to follow.
          </p>
                         <p usage="ewyb">The fourth railway package comprises two pillars, relating to technical and market-related issues. The three legislative proposals making up the technical pillar (revising interoperability and safety directives and developing the role of the ERA) were formally agreed in June 2015, and adopted by the EP in April 2016. The three proposals comprising the market pillar (amending directives on opening the market for passenger rail services, the governance of infrastructure and common rules pertaining to accounting) were finally adopted by the Council in October of that year (after modification), and by the Parliament in December. In June 2019 the ERA assumed responsibility for vehicle authorization, safety certification, and ERTMS trackside approval in eight EU member states, with the remainder to follow.</p>
                    </p-alternates>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>