<int-org-sectref id="SL1112122" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112121" slsdocid="1103443" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.291" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio mena">
                    <heading>The Middle East and the Mediterranean</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.234">In November 1995 a conference convened in Barcelona, Spain, issued the Barcelona Declaration, outlining a new EU-Mediterranean partnership. The process of co-operation and dialogue under this agreement became known as the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership, or Barcelona Process. In March 2008 the European Council agreed formally to transform the Barcelona Process into the Union for the Mediterranean (UfM), which was officially launched in July. Members of the UfM comprise the EU member states and 16 Southern Mediterranean countries: Albania, Algeria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Mauritania, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, North Macedonia, the Palestinian territories, the Syrian Arab Republic (currently suspended), Tunisia and Türkiye (formerly known as Turkey). Libya is an observer. A Secretariat was established in Barcelona in March 2010. A UfM Roadmap for Action was approved by regional ministers of foreign affairs meeting in Barcelona in January 2017. More than 60 regional co-operation projects have been approved under the UfM.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.236">In March 2003 the European Commission launched a European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) with the aim of enhancing co-operation with countries adjacent to the enlarged Union. In 2007 a new European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument (ENPI) replaced the existing financial programmes in place. Under the ENP, the EU negotiated bilateral Action Plans with 12 countries, establishing three- to five-year targets for political and economic co-operation. The Action Plans aimed to build on existing contractual relationships between the partner country and the EU (e.g. an Association Agreement or a Partnership and Co-operation Agreement—PCA). From 2014 the ENPI was replaced by the European Neighbourhood Instrument, for which the European Parliament (EP) approved funding of more than €15,000m. during 2014–20.</p>
                    <p>In February 2021 a new Agenda for the Mediterranean was proposed to reinforce the strategic partnership between the EU and its Southern Neighbourhood. For 2021–27 the existing funding programmes for the region were absorbed into a new funding instrument, the Neighbourhood, Development and International Cooperation Instrument (NDICI). It was envisaged that up to €7,000m. would be made available under the NDICI for 2021–27 (with total funding of €79,462m.) for the implementation of the Agenda for the Mediterranean.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.238">
          Turkey signed an Association Agreement with the EC in 1963 (suspended between 1980 and 1986 following a military coup), and applied for EU membership in April 1987 (see 
          <i>Enlargement</i>
          ). Accession talks began in October 2005. In October 2015 a Joint Action Plan was agreed between the European Commission and Turkey in order to ameliorate co-operation in responding to the migration crisis, caused, in particular, by the ongoing civil conflict in Syria. In March 2016 a new agreement was reached, known as the EU-Turkey Statement, providing for the return of migrants crossing into Greek territory and considered not to be in immediate need of international protection (see 
          <i>Justice, Migration and Home Affairs</i>
          ). EU-Turkey relations were strained by Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s uncompromising stance following a coup attempt in July of that year. Members of the EP (MEPs) have adopted several non-binding resolutions urging membership negotiations to be suspended, including in July 2017, March 2019 and May 2021. Relations with the EU were further strained after Turkey suspended application of the 2016 EU-Turkey
          
           agreement in February 2020, announcing that it would open the passage for migrants to cross its borders with Europe (following an upsurge in fighting in Syria, which caused the deaths of more than 30 Turkish soldiers). In March 2021 the European Council indicated its readiness to re-engage with Turkey on issues including an updated customs union, the resumption of high-level dialogue and increased co-operation in managing migration. In March 2023 the European Commission announced reconstruction aid to Türkiye of €1,000m. and humanitarian aid to Syria of €108m., following devastating earthquakes in those countries in February. The EU was to provide €26m. in humanitarian aid to Türkiye in 2024, for assistance to refugees and for those affected by the earthquakes in 2023.
        </p>
                    
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.239">
          Co-operation agreements concluded in the 1970s with the Maghreb countries (Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia), the Mashreq countries (Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria) and Israel covered free access to the community market for industrial products, customs preferences for certain agricultural products, and financial aid in the form of grants and loans from the European Investment Bank (EIB). In June 1992 the EC approved a proposal to conclude new bilateral agreements with the Maghreb countries, incorporating: political dialogue; financial, economic, technical and cultural co-operation; and the eventual establishment of a free trade area. An Association Agreement with Tunisia was signed in July 1995 and entered into force in March 1998. A similar agreement with Morocco (concluded in 1996) entered into force in March 2000. In March 1997 negotiations were initiated with Algeria on an Association Agreement that would incorporate political commitments relating to democracy and human rights; this was signed in December 2001 and entered into force in September 2005. An Association Agreement with Jordan was signed in November 1997 and entered into force in May 2002. The so-called 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="IO-DEVANDCO-OP.0001">Agadir Agreement</xr>
           on the establishment of a Free Trade Zone between the Arabic Mediterranean Nations was signed in February 2004 and came into force in March 2007. An interim EU Association Agreement with Lebanon was signed in June 2002, and entered into force in April 2006. Protracted negotiations on an Association Agreement with Syria were concluded in October 2004. A revised version of the Agreement was initialled in December 2008. In May 2011 the EU announced that co-operation with Syria was to be suspended, owing to the violent suppression of anti-Government protests there from March (and subsequent civil conflict—see below). In December the Council of the EU agreed that negotiations could commence towards Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreements (DCFTAs) with Egypt, Jordan, Morocco and Tunisia. Negotiations with Morocco were initiated in March 2013 but were later suspended; talks with Tunisia commenced in October 2015.
        </p>
                    <p>A co-operation agreement between the EC and the countries of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf, which entered into force in January 1990, provided for co-operation in industry, energy, tech­nology and other fields. A customs union was established in January 2003. A co-operation agreement between the EU and Qatar was signed in March 2018. </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.240">An Association Agreement with Israel was signed in 1995 and entered into force in June 2000. In 2004 an ENP Action Plan on further co-operation was agreed by the EU and Israel; it was adopted by the EU in February 2005 and by Israel in April.</p>
                    <p>
          The EU formed part of the Middle East Quartet (alongside the UN, the USA and the Russian Federation), which was established in July 2002 to mediate between Israel and the Palestinian Territories. An EU Police Mission for the Palestinian Territories commenced operations in January 2006, with an initial three-year mandate, subsequently repeatedly extended, to support the PA in establishing sustainable and effective policing arrangements. In February 2008 the European Commission launched a new mechanism, PEGASE, to support activities in four principal areas: governance (including fiscal reform, security and the rule of law); social development (including social protection, health and education); economic and private sector development; and development of public infrastructure (in areas such as water, the environment and energy). In October 2023, shortly after terrorist attacks perpetrated by the Islamic Resistance Movement (Hamas) in Israel, the European Council condemned Hamas and its acts `in the strongest possible terms’, and emphasized Israel’s `right to defend itself in line with humanitarian and international law’. However, the EU member states struggled to adopt a common position on the Israel–Hamas conflict: at a vote calling for a humanitarian ceasefire held in the UN General Assembly in December, 17 EU member states voted in favour, while two voted against and the remainder abstained. In October the Commission announced that current humanitarian aid to Gaza would increase from €25m. to more than €75m. In January 2024 a non-binding resolution by the EP called for a permanent ceasefire (as long as all hostages taken by Hamas were immediately released and Hamas itself was dismantled).
          
                    </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.242">
          During 2002 attempts were made to improve relations with Iran, as negotiations began in preparation for a Trade and Co-operation Agreement. In mid-2003 the EU (in conformity with US policy) warned Iran to accept stringent new nuclear inspections, and threatened the country with economic repercussions unless it restored international trust in its nuclear programme. A comprehensive dialogue between the EU and Iran was suspended by Iran in December 2003. In January 2005 the EU resumed trade talks with Iran after the Iranian authorities agreed to suspend uranium enrichment. However, these talks were halted in August, following Iran’s resumption of uranium conversion to gas (the stage preceding enrichment). Following Iran’s removal of international seals from a nuclear research facility in January 2006, the EU supported efforts to refer Iran to the UN Security Council. In December the Council criticized the country’s failure to implement measures required by both the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the UN Security Council in respect of its nuclear programme. EU trade sanctions against Iran were strengthened in August 2008, after Iran failed to halt its uranium enrichment programme. In July 2010 EU ministers responsible for foreign affairs adopted a new set of sanctions, prohibiting investment, technical assistance and technology transfers to Iran’s energy sector, and also targeting the country’s financial services, insurance and transport sectors. Sanctions were strengthened in 2011 and 2012. In November 2013 negoti­ations commenced between the E3/EU+3 grouping (comprising the People’s Republic of China, France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom and the USA, and led by the EU’s High Representative) and Iran, with the aim of concluding a comprehensive solution to ensure the long-term safety of Iran’s nuclear programme. In July 2015 agreement on a Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) was reached between Iran and the E3/EU+3, which sought to guarantee the peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. The JCPOA was implemented from January 2016, thereby enabling the EU, the UN and the USA to lift their nuclear-related financial sanctions. However, in May 2018 President Trump announced the USA’s withdrawal from the agreement and the reimposition of sanctions. The EU remained committed to the implementation of the JCPOA, but the US sanctions had strained relations with Iran, and Iran had breached the agreement. Negotiations with Iran, with the indirect participation of the USA, resumed in April 2021. In August 2022 the EU presented a new, draft agreement to Iran for consideration. Following the repression by Iranian security forces of widespread protests in Iran after the death of a woman in late 2022 who had been arrested for not wearing a 
          <i>hijab </i>
          (headscarf) in accordance with government rules, the EU extended sanctions to a number of individuals and entities, including Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting. The imposition of sanctions against individuals and organizations in relation to human rights violations in Iran and Iran’s military support of Russia in its war against Ukraine continued during 2023.
        </p>
                    <p usage="edio mena">An Association Agreement with Tunisia entered into force in 1998. The EU and Tunisia established a so-called privileged partnership in 2012. An EU-Tunisia agreement was signed in July 2023, which included funding of some €100m. from the EU to help curb migration (Tunisia having become a main departure point for migrants seeking a route to Europe).</p>
                    <p>
          An Association Agreement with Egypt was signed in June 2001 and ratified in June 2004. In August 2013, following the escalation of violence in Egypt in that month, EU ministers responsible for foreign affairs agreed to suspend the sale of armaments to the country. The Association Council of the EU and Egypt met in Luxembourg in June 2022, and new Partnership Priorities were adopted for the period until 2027. The EU and Egypt pledged to enhance dialogue and co-operation in three priority areas: the sustainable modern economy and social development, foreign policy, and stability. A Memorandum of Understanding on renewable hydrogen co-operation was signed between the EU and Egypt in November 2022. In June 2023 the EU allocated funding to Egypt amounting to some €20m. to help the country to assist refugees from Sudan. The EU and Egypt agreed in March 2024 to elevate the Association Agreement to a Strategic and Comprehensive Partnership.
          
                    </p>
                    <p>
          In July 1998 an EU-Yemen co-operation agreement entered into force, focusing on development and economic issues. After the security and humanitarian situation in Yemen deteriorated in 2015, the EU increased its provision of humanitarian aid to the country. The EU delegation to Yemen was evacuated and since 2017 has been based in Amman, Jordan. The EU allocated some €145m. in humanitarian aid to assist the population during the ongoing conflict and famine in 2023. In January 2024 it was proposed that an EU mission in the Red Sea be established to protect commercial vessels, following attacks by Yemen-based Houthi (Ansar Allah—Supporters of God) rebels on commercial vessels in the Red Sea area; EUNAVFOR ASPIDES was launched in February.
          
                    </p>
                    <p>Formal negotiations on an EU-Libya Framework Agreement began in November 2008. Negotiations were suspended in February 2011, when violent clashes broke out in Libya between anti-Government protesters and armed forces loyal to the Libyan leader, Col Muammar al-Qaddafi. Later that month the Council adopted a UN Security Council Resolution prohibiting the sale to Libya of arms and ammunition, and agreed to impose additional sanctions against those responsible for the violent repression of civilian protests. The Council also imposed a visa ban on several people, including al-Qaddafi and members of his family, and froze the assets of al-Qaddafi and 25 other people. After Qaddafi’s killing in October, the European Council agreed measures to support the Libyan economy and to assist the UN mission in Libya. A number of frozen assets were released in support of humanitarian and civilian needs, and a ban on the use of European airspace by Libyan aircraft was removed. In November the EU’s Tripoli office (opened in August) became the headquarters of a new EU delegation to Libya. In May 2013 a civilian EU Border Assistance Mission (EUBAM) was launched to help to improve border security. By July 2014, however, the security situation in Tripoli had deteriorated and the EU delegation and EUBAM left the country. The EU participated in the Berlin Conference of January 2020 to support UN efforts seeking a peaceful resolution of the continuing crisis in Libya. In March a new Mediterranean naval mission, EU NAVFOR MED IRINI, was launched to enforce the UN arms embargo on Libya.</p>
                    <p>In response to the forcible quashing, from March 2011, of anti-Government protests by the Syrian authorities, the EU imposed a number of restrictive measures, including an arms embargo and targeted sanctions, comprising a travel ban and the freezing of assets, against those deemed to be responsible for, or involved with, the repression. By August 2012 the EU had imposed 17 sets of sanctions on the Syrian authorities; sanctions were repeatedly extended. The EU delegation to Syria closed in December, owing to security concerns. In August the High Representative expressed deep concern at reports of the use of chemical weapons in Syria, and in February 2014 the EU pledged €12m. to help to dismantle and destroy stockpiles of chemical weaponry in Syria. An EU Strategy for Syria was adopted in April 2017, and in April 2018 the EU co-chaired, with the UN, the second Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region (the first having been convened in the previous year); the seventh such conference took place in June 2023. The EU, collectively, has been the most significant provider of international aid to Syria throughout the conflict. In 2023 €186.5m. was allocated by the Commission to humanitarian aid in Syria.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.2051">The increased tension in the Middle East prior to the military action in Iraq in March 2003 strained relations between member states of the EU. In February 2003 the European Council held an extraordinary meeting to discuss the crisis in Iraq, and issued a statement reiterating its commitment to the central role of the UN in maintaining international order. In April, however, the EU leaders accepted a dominant role for the USA and the UK in post-war Iraq, and Denmark, Spain and the Netherlands announced plans to send peacekeeping troops to Iraq. An EU integrated rule of law mission for Iraq commenced operations in July, with an initial mandate of 12 months. The EU provided €933m. in reconstruction and humanitarian assistance to Iraq in 2003–08. In November 2017 a civilian EU advisory mission to Iraq commenced operations in the capital, Baghdad, in order to support the Government in implementing reforms to the security sector.</p>
                    <p>Meanwhile, in August 2014 the European Council expressed dismay at the worsening security situation in Iraq and Syria, caused by the declaration of an Islamic caliphate over parts of the two countries’ territories by Islamic State (IS—formerly known as Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant), and the widespread human rights violations carried out against Christians and other minorities. The European Council noted that the outbreak of civil conflict in Syria had facilitated the emergence of IS, which it recognized as a threat to security in Europe, and announced its intention to co-operate with the USA and other countries in order to counter the threat posed by IS and other organizations deemed to pose a terrorist threat. A comprehensive EU regional strategy for Syria, Iraq and the threat from IS was adopted by the Council in April 2017.</p>
                    <p>In January 2018 the EU adopted a new strategy for Iraq, to support the country following the territorial defeat of IS, by supporting the country in the principal areas of territorial integrity, and ethnic and religious diversity; efforts towards the introduction and maintenance of stable and democratic government; humanitarian need; economic growth and job creation; transitional justice; and the introduction of a formal dialogue on migration. A PCA with Iraq, was signed in May 2012 and entered into force in August 2018. In September 2020 the EU signed a financing agreement with the Government of Iraq, pledging some €90m. in support of stability and the country’s socioeconomic recovery and development amid the COVID-19 pandemic.</p>
                    
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>