<int-org-sectref id="SL1112109" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112108" slsdocid="1103382" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.289" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <heading>Central and South-Eastern Europe</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.207" usage="ewyb edio casee">
          In December 1989 EC heads of government agreed to establish a 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="EBRD.IO">European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)</xr>
          , with participation by member states of the 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="OECD.IO">Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development</xr>
           and the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, to promote investment in Eastern Europe; the EBRD began operations in April 1991. In the 1990s so-called Europe Agreements were signed with Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland (1991), Bulgaria and Romania (1993), Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania (1995), and Slovenia (1996), which led to formal applications for membership of the EU. On 1 May 2004 the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia acceded to the EU. Bulgaria and Romania formally joined the EU on 1 January 2007. In July 2006 a new Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA) replaced previous funding programmes. The IPA funds aim to provide targeted assistance to candidate countries for membership of the EU and potential candidate countries; the IPA III runs in 2021–27. Croatia joined the EU on 1 July 2013. At early 2024 Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Serbia were Central and South-Eastern European candidate countries for membership.
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.225555" usage="ewyb edio casee">A Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA) with Albania entered into force in April 2009; later that month Albania applied for the status of a candidate country for EU membership. In November 2010 the European Commission agreed to introduce visa liberalization for Albania, with effect from mid-December. Albania formally became a candidate country in June 2014. In October 2018 the EU and Albania signed a co-operation agreement on border management between that country and the European Border and Coast Guard Agency (FRONTEX). In October 2019, at a meeting of the European Council, the leaders of France, Denmark and the Netherlands vetoed the opening of accession negotiations with Albania, and French President Emmanuel Macron also failed to support opening negotiations with North Macedonia. In March 2020, however, EU ministers reached political agreement on opening accession talks with the two nations, which was subsequently endorsed by the European Council. Nevertheless, the opening of negotiations was delayed, principally owing to a Bulgarian veto against North Macedonia over issues of national identity, although it was also considered that necessary reforms by Albania (in particular those relating to the functioning of the Constitutional Court and media legislation) remained unfulfilled. Accession negotiations with Albania finally opened on 19 July 2022.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.218" usage="ewyb edio casee">Aid to Yugoslavia was suspended in July 1991, following the declarations of independence by the Yugoslav republics of Croatia and Slovenia, and the subsequent outbreak of civil conflict. In November the application of the Community’s co-operation agreements with Yugo­slavia was suspended (with exemptions for the republics which co-operated in peace negotiations), and a trade embargo was imposed on Serbia and Montenegro in 1992.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.220" usage="ewyb edio casee">In July 1994 the EU Administration of Mostar was formally established to restore the administrative infrastructure of the city, situated in southern Bosnia and Herzegovina. The EU supported US-led efforts to negotiate peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which resulted in the Dayton accords of 1995, ending the conflict. In January 1996 the EU announced its intention to recognize the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY—Serbia and Montenegro).</p>
                    <p>In January 2003 a new EU Police Mission (EUPM) took over from the United Nations (UN) peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the first operation under the common European Security and Defence Policy. The EUPM was re-established in 2006 to support the police reform process and completed its mandate in June 2012. Meanwhile, in January 2004 the Bosnian Government issued a decree providing for the reunification of Mostar (divided between Croat- and Bosnian-controlled municipalities since 1993) into a single admin­istration, thereby fulfilling one of the major preconditions for the signature of an SAA. In December 7,000 troops (EUFOR) were deployed under EU command in Bosnia and Herzegovina, taking over from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), with a mission to ensure stability in the country; EUFOR was reduced in size in March 2007. An SAA with the EU was signed in June 2008 and entered into force in 2015. In November 2010 the European Commission agreed to introduce visa liberalization for Bosnia and Herzegovina, with effect from mid-December. Progress in meeting obligations for EU integration was slow, and the ruling parties failed to adopt constitutional amendments required by a 2009 ruling of the European Court of Human Rights. In late 2014 a new EU action plan was proposed, under which financial assistance would be released in exchange for commitments by all main political parties to significant reforms. In February 2015 both houses of the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina approved a statement committing the country to the programme of reforms. In mid-February 2016 Bosnia and Herzegovina formally submitted its application for membership of the EU and it was granted candidate status in December 2022, with the proviso that the country implement 14 `key priorities’ focusing on democracy and state functionality, the rule of law, administrative reform and fundamental rights. The European Council agreed in December 2023 to open accession negotiations with Bosnia and Herzegovina, once a degree of compliance with the criteria for membership had been reached. The EU Commission in March 2024 recommended the opening of accession negotiations with Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European Council endorsed the recommendation later in the same month.</p>
                    <p>An SAA was signed with Croatia in October 2001 and entered into force in February 2005. Meanwhile, in February 2003 Croatia submitted a formal application for membership of the EU. Planned accession talks with Croatia were postponed in March, owing to the failure of the Croatian authorities to demonstrate full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Negotiations were initiated in October. In December Gen. (retd) Ante Gotovina, who had been charged with war crimes against ethnic Serbs in 1995, was apprehended, thereby removing the main perceived obstacle to EU membership. A border dispute with Slovenia appeared to threaten progress towards membership from late 2008, but a subsequent referendum in Slovenia secured support for the resolution of the dispute by international arbitration. Croatia completed membership negotiations in mid-2011, and accession took place in mid-2013.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.224">
          In December 1993 six member states of the EU formally recognized the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia (FYRM—now North Macedonia) as an independent state. Diplomatic recognition from the Community had been withheld in 1992, owing to pressure from the Greek Government, which feared that the existence of an independent Macedonia could imply a claim on the Greek province of the same name. In February 1994 Greece imposed a commercial embargo against the FYRM, on the grounds that the use of the name and symbols (e.g. on the state flag) of `Macedonia’ was a threat to Greek national security. In April the Commission commenced legal proceedings in the European Court of Justice against Greece. In September 1995 the FYRM agreed to change the design of its state flag, and in October Greece ended its economic blockade of the FYRM. A trade and co-operation agreement with the FYRM entered into force in January 1998. In April 2001 an SAA was signed with the FYRM and an interim agreement was adopted, providing for trade-related matters of the SAA to enter into effect in June. A NATO contingent in the FYRM was replaced by an EU-led mission on 31 March 20
          
          03; it was replaced in December by an EU police mission, Operation Proxima, the mandate of which expired at the end of 2005. The SAA entered into force in April 2004. A formal application for membership of the EU had been submitted in March, and the FYRM was granted candidate status in December 2005. In October 2009 the European Commission recommended that membership negotiations commence, but Greece objected to the initiation of negotiations while the dispute over the country’s name remained unresolved. In mid-December visa liberalization entered into force for travel within the Schengen area. Despite the FYRM’s dispute with Greece, in March 2012 the FYRM began a preliminary dialogue with the EU. However, a severe political crisis in the country from 2015 led to EU concern. In mid-2015 cross-party talks between the FYRM Government and opposition leaders, mediated by the European Commissioner responsible for European Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement Negotiations, Johannes Hahn, resulted in an agreement to hold early legislative elections, although these were repeatedly postponed. A new accord was reached in July 2016 with the mediation of the EU and the USA; elections took place in December, and a new Government took office in May 2017. In July 2018 agreement was reached (subject to approval by a referendum in the FYRM and the legislatures of both sides) to rename the country as the `Republic of North Macedonia’; the new name was officially adopted in February 2019. The resolution of the long-term dispute with Greece removed the principal obstacle to EU accession; however, from November 2020 a bilateral dispute with Bulgaria continued to obstruct the opening of negotiations; a resolution was reached in July 2022, enabling accession talks to be launched with North Macedonia.
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.226">In 1998 the escalation of violence in the Serbian province of Kosovo (FRY), between Serbs and the ethnic Albanian majority, prompted the imposition of EU sanctions. Several EU countries participated in a NATO military offensive against Yugoslavia, which was initiated in March 1999 following the continued repression of ethnic Albanians in Kosovo by Serbian forces. In September sanctions against Kosovo and Montenegro were eased. Following the election of a new administration in the FRY in late 2000, the EU withdrew most remaining sanctions against the FRY and pledged financial support.</p>
                    <p>
          In February 2008 the Assembly of Kosovo endorsed a declaration establishing the province as a sovereign state, independent from Serbia. A supervisory EU mission (the EU Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo—EULEX), with some 1,900 foreign personnel, became operational in 2008 (with full deployment from April 2009). EULEX assumed responsibility from the UN Mission in Kosovo for police and judicial functions in December 2008 (EULEX’s mandate was repeatedly extended, and was amended in June 2018 to remove its executive judicial function). In July 2010 the European Parliament (EP) adopted a resolution that reiterated its desire for all EU member states to recognize Kosovo’s independence, the legality of which was upheld by the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) later that month. Five EU member states (Cyprus, Greece, Romania, Slovakia and Spain) continue to withhold recognition of Kosovo as an independent state. Negotiations on an SAA commenced in late October, and were concluded in May 2014. The SAA entered into force in April 2016. In September 2018 the EP voted in favour of opening negotiations on liberalizing visa requirements for Kosovo; in December 2022 EP, Commission and Council representatives reached agreement on visa liberalization, which came into effect in January 2024.
          
           Kosovo formally applied for EU membership in December 2022
          
           . Meanwhile, in February 2017 the EU had approved the appointment of 19 judges to serve at the new Kosovo Specialist Chambers, in The Hague, Netherlands, in order to investigate allegations of war crimes by former members of the Kosovo Liberation Army. In June 2023 the EU introduced sanctions against Kosovo, including reduced financial co-operation, following violent protests after local elections in northern areas of Kosovo.
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.228">Negoti­ations on an SAA between the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (as the FRY became known in February 2003) and the EU commenced in November 2005, but were terminated in May 2006. The EU recognized Montenegrin independence in June. In June 2007 the President of the Commission invited Serbia to resume SAA negotiations, but in February they were again suspended. However, in late April EU ministers responsible for foreign affairs signed the SAA with Serbia, which was accompanied by a provisional document granting Serbia access to benefits based on the SAA before all EU members had ratified the Agreement; however, its implementation was suspended until EU member states agreed unanimously on Serbia’s full co-operation with the ICTY. In mid-December 2009 visa liberalization was implemented for Serbian citizens travelling within the Schengen area. In late December Serbia formally applied for membership of the EU, and in June 2010 the EU agreed to begin the ratification process for the SAA. EU heads of state and of government officially approved Serbia’s candidate status in March 2012 (following progress in dialogue between Serbian and Kosovo representatives in Brussels). In April 2013 EU-mediated talks in Brussels resulted in the signature of a provisional accord on the normalization of relations by the premiers of Serbia and Kosovo (the First Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations). In June the European Council officially endorsed the opening of talks on EU accession with Serbia. The SAA entered into force in September 2013. Although accession negotiations with Serbia officially commenced in January 2014, negotiations on the first two of the 35 `chapters’ or policy areas to be discussed were only opened in December 2015.</p>
                    <p>Following the declaration of independence by Montenegro in June 2006, the Council pledged to develop the relationship of the EU with Montenegro as a sovereign state. The first Enhanced Permanent Dialogue meeting between Montenegro and the EU was held in the Montenegrin capital, Podgorica, in July, when the Council adopted a mandate for the negotiation of an SAA with Montenegro. In October 2007 Montenegro signed an SAA with the EU, which entered into force in May 2010. Meanwhile, Montenegro had applied for membership of the EU in December 2008. From December 2009 Montenegrin citizens were no longer required to hold a visa to travel within the Schengen area. In December 2010 Montenegro was formally granted the status of a candidate country for EU membership, and accession negotiations commenced in June 2012.</p>
                    <p>In February 2018 the Commission adopted a new strategy on enlargement to include, and increase its involvement in, the Western Balkans, as part of a larger initiative to strengthen the Union by 2025. The new Western Balkan strategy provided for six principal areas of engagement in 2018–20 to strengthen the rule of law; to develop increased co-operation on security and migration; further to support socioeconomic development; to expand the EU’s Energy Union into the region and to improve transport links; to improve telecommunications infrastructure and to reduce `roaming’ charges for mobile telephone use; and to promote reconciliation and positive relationships between neighbouring states. The Western Balkan strategy detailed the measures required for implementation by Montenegro and Serbia in order to secure accession by 2025, while emphasizing that there was potential for other nations to accelerate their progress towards EU membership. Notably, the Commission proposed implementing special arrangements in order to ensure that future member states from the region would not be able to block the accession of other Western Balkan candidate states. Annual EU-Western Balkans summits are held, most recently in Brussels in December 2023.</p>
                    <p usage="casee">In June 1995 the European Council endorsed a proposal by the Commission to reform and strengthen the EU’s Mediterranean policy. In November a conference of foreign affairs ministers of the EU member states and 11 Mediterranean non-member countries (including Albania) was convened in Barcelona, Spain. The conference resolved to establish a permanent Euro-Mediterranean ministerial dialogue, and issued the Barcelona Declaration, outlining the main objective of the partnership, which was to create a region of peace, security and prosperity. The process of co-operation and dialogue under this agreement became known as the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership (or Barcelona Process). A conference was convened in November 2000, in Marseille, France, which focused on the adoption of a new common strategy for the Mediterranean, aimed at strengthening the Barcelona Process, which was identified as having three main areas of co-operation: political dialogue; economic co-operation and free trade; and human, social and cultural dialogue. In March 2008 the European Council approved a proposal formally to transform the Barcelona Process into a Union for the Mediterranean (UfM), which was officially launched at the Paris Summit for the Mediterranean in July by heads of state and of government from the EU member states and from the member states and observers of the Barcelona Process. Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Monaco and Montenegro were also admitted to the UfM: Barcelona Process, which includes all of the EU member states together with an additional 16 regional states (North Macedonia joined in November 2022). The headquarters of the UfM opened in Barcelona in March 2010. In February 2021 the European Commission and the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy proposed a new Agenda for the Mediterranean to reinforce the strategic partnership between the EU and its Southern Neighbourhood, which was approved by the Council of the EU in April and focused on human development, governance and the rule of law; economic prosperity and digital transition; peace and security; migration; and climate resilience, energy and the environment.</p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>