<int-org-sectref id="SL1112144" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1112143" slsdocid="1103453" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="WB02048.IO.TXT.294" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                    <heading>The USA and Canada</heading>
                    <p-alternates default="EDIO" type="ALTERNATES">
                         <p usage="edio">
            A framework agreement for commercial and economic co-operation between the EC and Canada, signed in Ottawa in 1976, was superseded in 1990 by a Declaration on EC-Canada Relations. In December 1996 a political declaration on EU-Canada relations was adopted, specifying areas for co-operation and at a summit held in Ottawa in March 2004 Canada and the EU adopted a Partnership Agenda to promote political and economic co-operation. In November 2005 Canada and the EU signed an agreement creating a framework for Canada’s participation in the EU’s crisis management operations. In September 2014 negotiations were concluded between the EU and Canada on a Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA). The CETA was signed by both sides in October 2016 and approved by the European Parliament (EP) in February 2017; it entered into force, on a provisional basis, in September
            
             . (At March 2024 17 EU member states had ratified the agreement.)
          </p>
                         <p usage="ewyb">At a summit held in Ottawa in March 2004, Canada and the EU adopted a Partnership Agenda to promote political and economic co-operation. In November 2005 Canada and the EU signed an agreement creating a framework for Canada’s participation in the EU’s crisis management operations. In September 2014 negotiations were concluded between the EU and Canada on a Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA). The CETA was signed by both sides in October 2016 and approved by the EP in February 2017; it entered into force, on a provisional basis, in September.</p>
                    </p-alternates>
                    <p-alternates default="EDIO" type="ALTERNATES">
                         <p usage="edio">A number of specific agreements were concluded between the EC and the USA: a co-operation agreement on the peaceful use of atomic energy entered into force in 1959, and agreements on environmental matters and on fisheries came into force in 1974 and 1984, respectively. Additional agreements provide for co-operation in other fields of scientific research and development, while bilateral contacts take place in many areas not covered by a formal agreement. A Transatlantic Declaration on EC-US relations was concluded in November 1990: the two parties agreed to consult each other on important matters of common interest, and to increase formal contacts. A new Transatlantic Agenda for EU-US relations was signed by the US President and the Presidents of the Commission and the European Council at a meeting in Madrid, Spain, in December 1995. In June 1997 the EU and the USA agreed to introduce a mutual recognition agreement, to enable goods (including pharma­ceutical products, telecommunications equipment and electrical apparatus) undergoing tests in Europe to be marketed in the USA or Canada without the need for further testing. In May 1998, at an EU-US summit held in London, United Kingdom, a new Transatlantic Economic Partnership (TEP) was launched, to remove tech­nical trade barriers, eliminate industrial tariffs, establish a free trade area in services, and further liberalize measures relating to government procurement, intellectual property and investment. (The agricultural and audiovisual sectors were excluded from the TEP.) At an EU-US summit held in April 2007, in Washington, DC, USA, a Framework for Advancing Transatlantic Economic Integration between the USA and the EU was adopted. In February 2012 the EU and the USA announced plans to launch negotiations, with the aim of concluding a new, bilateral trade agreement. Negotiations on the proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) with the USA commenced in mid-2013. However, the TTIP attracted controversy, with concerns primarily focusing on the protection of regulatory and environmental standards, public services and investors’ rights, and it appeared moribund by the end of US President Barack Obama’s term of office in early 2017. On 2 December 2020, following the election of Joe Biden as US President, the European Commission proposed a new transatlantic agenda for global co-operation in a number of areas, including environmental protection and efforts to combat the threat posed by COVID-19 (following a policy of increased US protectionism and a focus on domestic priorities under President Donald Trump from 2017).</p>
                         <p usage="ewyb">In May 1998, at an EU-US summit held in the British capital, London, a Transatlantic Economic Partnership (TEP) was launched, to remove tech­nical trade barriers, eliminate industrial tariffs, establish a free trade area in services, and further liberalize measures relating to government procurement, intellectual property and investment. (The agricultural and audiovisual sectors were excluded from the TEP.) At an EU-US summit held in April 2007, in Washington, DC, USA, a Framework for Advancing Transatlantic Economic Integration between the USA and the EU was adopted. In February 2012 the EU and the USA announced plans to launch negotiations, with the aim of concluding a new, bilateral trade agreement. Negotiations on the proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) with the USA commenced in mid-2013. However, concerns arose on both sides during negotiations, primarily focusing on the protection of regulatory and environmental standards, public services and investors’ rights, and efforts to negotiate an agreement faltered by early 2017.</p>
                         <p usage="ewyb">Following the election of Donald Trump as US President in November 2016, President of the European Council Donald Tusk confirmed that the EU would continue to pursue a co-operative relationship with the USA and seek to maintain transatlantic unity. In 2018 tensions in trade relations between the EU and the USA intensified, after the USA imposed tariffs of 25% and 10%, respectively, on imports of steel and aluminium from the EU, apparently owing to national security concerns, prompting the EU to impose retaliatory tariffs. Following a meeting held in Washington, DC, in July 2018 between US President Trump and European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, a joint statement was published, with an agreement to launch new trade negotiations; however, talks did not proceed, in part owing to the insistence by the USA that agricultural products be included in any agreement; meanwhile, the World Trade Organization approved the imposition by the USA of additional tariffs on EU goods in that year. In December 2020, following the election of Joe Biden as US President, the European Commission proposed a new transatlantic agenda for global co-operation in a number of areas, including environmental protection and efforts to combat the threat posed by COVID-19. In September 2021 a new, ministerial-level, joint EU-US Trade and Technology Council (TTC) met in Pittsburgh, PA, USA, for the first time, with the aim of helping to co-ordinate approaches towards global technologies, to deepen economic and trade relations, and to promote democratic values.</p>
                    </p-alternates>
                    <p>
          Meanwhile, following revelations, in 2013, of large-scale intelligence-gathering programmes by the USA, in November the Commission presented a six-point action plan detailing measures required in order to restore trust in data flows between the EU and the USA, including the rapid adoption of revised data protection legislation; proposals to strengthen the bilateral, voluntary EU-US `safe harbour’ agreement of 2000, under which US companies pledged to protect the data privacy of EU customers; strengthening data protection safeguards; a commitment to the use of the existing EU-US Mutual Legal Assistance agreement
          
           and existing sectoral agreements to secure access to data from the EU; addressing European concerns as part of the ongoing review of surveillance procedures taking place within the USA; and the international promotion of standards pertaining to privacy. In September 2015 a new EU-US data protection agreement was initialled, establishing a comprehensive framework for co-operation between the EU and the USA on matters relating to law enforcement, and covering personal information exchanged between the EU and USA in relation to criminal offences (including terrorism). In February 2016 the Commission and the USA announced that political agreement had been reached on an arrangement effectively superseding the safe harbour agreement, which had been declared invalid by the European Court of Justice (ECJ) in October 2015. The new EU-US Privacy Shield was adopted by the Commission in July 2016, but in July 2020 it too was declared invalid by the ECJ.
        </p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>