<int-org-sectref id="SL2839721" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="2839720" slsdocid="2824092" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="IO-EU.1261142385" id-root="io-eu" iso="io-eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio ass">
                    <heading>Sub-Saharan Africa</heading>
                    <p>In June 2000, meeting in Cotonou, Benin, heads of state and of government of the EU and African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) states concluded the 20-year Cotonou Agreement, which officially entered into force on 1 April 2003. (Previously, the principal means of co-operation between the EC and developing countries were the Lomé Conventions concluded in 1975–89.) A financial protocol attached to the Cotonou Agreement indicated the funds available to the ACP through the European Development Fund (EDF), the main instrument for EU aid for development co-operation in ACP countries. A revised agreement was signed in mid-2005, providing for free trade arrangements with the most developed ACP countries. In 2010 negotiations were concluded on a second revision of the Cotonou Agreement, which was signed in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, in June.</p>
                    <p>
          The Cotonou Agreement was due to expire in February 2020 (subsequently extended); negotiations on future relations with the ACP states commenced in September 2018. The ninth summit of ACP leaders was held in Nairobi, Kenya, in December 2019. The Nairobi Nguvu Ya Pamoja declaration was endorsed, setting out the ACP’s position on issues including good governance, security and the environment, and detailed commitments by ACP leaders. Agreement was reached on significant revisions to the Georgetown Agreement (which formally constituted the ACP in 1975). From 5 April 2020, in conformity with the provisions of the revised Georgetown Agreement, the ACP states became collectively known as the 
          <xr pageref="N" ref="ECDEVT.IO.1">Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States (OACPS)</xr>
          . An OACPS-EU Partnership Agreement was initialled in mid-April 2021. In July 2023 the Council adopted a decision on the signature and provisional application of the agreement, which was signed officially by the EU and the EU member states in November at the 46th session of the ACP-EU Council of Ministers, held in Samoa. The agreement was provisionally applied from 1 January 2024 (pending ratification by all parties).
        </p>
                    <p id="EU.IO.ASS.3">
          Meanwhile, the first summit representing the institutionalization of Africa-EU dialogue was convened in April 2000, in Cairo, Egypt. At the second Africa-EU summit, held in December 2007 in Lisbon, Portugal, a Joint Africa-EU Strategy was adopted, providing a long-term framework for future political co-operation. At the fourth Africa-EU summit, held in Brussels in April 2014, a political declaration was adopted by heads of state and of government. The action plan for 2014–20 identified five strategic areas of focus: peace and security; democracy, good governance and human rights; human development; sustainable and inclusive development, together with growth and continental integration; and global and emerging issues. Joint Annual Forums were to be introduced, and the summit also adopted a declaration on migration and mobility, and plans, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , to combat illegal migration and human trafficking and to improve international protection. In August the EU launched a Pan-African Programme, which was allocated a budget of €845m. for 2014–20, to facilitate implementation of the Joint Africa-EU Strategy. In November 2017 the fifth Africa-EU summit was held in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire. A declaration was adopted establishing joint priorities in four principal areas: investment in people through education and training; strengthening resilience, peace, security and governance; mobility and migration; and economic investment. A country-specific External Investment Plan sought to promote investment in African states to stimulate growth and employment, and to combat irregular migration. A joint statement was also adopted on human rights in Libya, condemning the treatment of migrants and refugees by criminal organizations. In March 2020 the Commission proposed a new Comprehensive Strategy with Africa, based on five priority areas: a partnership for green transition and energy access; a partnership for digital transformation; a partnership for sustainable growth and jobs; a partnership for peace and security governance; and a partnership on migration and mobility. The sixth EU-Africa summit took place in Brussels in February 2022, following delays resulting from the COVID-19 crisis. EU and African Union leaders agreed on a new Joint Vision for 2030, supported by the Global Gateway Africa-Europe Investment Package, totalling some €150,000m.
          
                    </p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio ass">
          The Council has adopted specific strategies and action plans for the Horn of Africa (East Africa), the Gulf of Guinea and for security and development in the Sahel. The EU also maintains several missions in Africa. Operation EU NAVFOR Somalia was established in 2008 in support of UN Security Council resolutions aimed at deterring and repressing acts of piracy and armed robbery in waters off the coast of Somalia, and protecting vulnerable vessels in that area. In February 2010 the Council established the EU Training Mission for Somalia (EUTM Somalia). The establishment of EUCAP Sahel Niger was approved by the Council in July 2012, as a training, advisory and assistance mission aimed at augmenting the capacity of Niger’s security forces to combat terrorism and organized crime; a military partnership mission (EUMPM) was established in December 2022. The Nigerien Government announced its withdrawal from co-operation with both missions in December 2023
          
           .
          
           In July 2012 EUCAP Nestor (now EUCAP Somalia) was established to support the rule of law in Somalia and the maritime capacity of Djibouti, Kenya, Seychelles and Tanzania, complementing the EU’s anti-piracy naval force Operation ATALANTA (EU NAVFOR Somalia) and EUTM Somalia. EUTM Mali was launched in February 2013 to increase the military efficacy of that country’s armed forces, in an effort to facilitate the restoration of Mali’s territorial integrity, under civilian leadership. In April 2014 a civilian mission, EUCAP Sahel Mali, was established to help to support the security situation in Mali. In April 2016 the Council agreed to dispatch a military training mission to the Central African Republic (CAR), known as EUTM RCA; the EU suspended the work of EUTM RCA in the CAR in December 2021 amid concerns that mercenaries employed by a Russian private contractor, the Wagner Group, and accused of human rights violations were working closely with CAR military forces. EUTM Mali and EUCAP Sahel Mali were partially suspended in April 2022, however, an adapted EUCAP Sahel Mali was extended in January 2023 until 31 January 2025. Meanwhile, a military training mission in Mozambique (EUTM Mozambique) was established in October 2021. In December 2023 EU ministers responsible for foreign affairs approved the launch of an EU security and defence initiative to support countries in the Gulf of Guinea, initially for a period of two years.
          
                    </p>
                    <p>
          In September 2015 the European Commission announced that it was to create an Emergency Trust Fund for stability and addressing root causes of irregular migration and displaced persons in Africa. The Fund, established in November, focuses assistance on the regions of the Sahel and Lake Chad, the Horn of Africa and North Africa, and seeks to help to strengthen the rule of law, improve socioeconomic opportunities and develop migration management policies. By October 2023 248 programmes had been approved, totalling some €4,900m.
          
           An agreement was made with Mauritania in early 2024 with funding of €210m., part of which was to be used to deter irregular migration, Mauritania being an embarkation point for people seeking to reach Europe via the Spanish Canary Islands.
          
                    </p>
                    <p>Negotiations were completed in June 2023 for an Economic Partnership Agreement with Kenya.</p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>