<int-org-sectref id="SL2839769" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="2839768" slsdocid="2839731" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="IO-EU.SOUTH_ASIA.1263566287" id-root="io-eu.south_asia" iso="io-eu.south_asia" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio sasia">
                    <heading>South Asia</heading>
                    <p>Bilateral non-preferential co-operation agreements were signed with Ban­gladesh, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka between 1973 and 1976. Further, extended agreements with India came into force in 1981 and 1994. The first EU-India summit meeting was held in Lisbon, Portugal, in June 2000. In November 2004 the EU and India signed a strategic partnership agreement. In September 2005 a joint action plan was agreed, which would establish a dialogue on security issues, disarmament and non-proliferation, increase co-operation in efforts to combat terrorism, and create a high-level trade group to examine ways to strengthen economic relations. An agreement on India’s participation in the EU’s Galileo civil satellite navigation and positioning system was also signed. An EU-India summit was held in Brussels, Belgium, in December 2010, at which a joint declaration on international terrorism was adopted. In March 2016 an EU-India summit meeting was held in Brussels, and an EU-India Agenda for Action 2020 was endorsed, establishing a five-year roadmap for engagement; both sides agreed to make efforts towards negotiating a bilateral agreement on trade and investment. In November 2018 the EU adopted a new strategy on India, which sought to strengthen co-operation with that country, in the context of the strategic partnership between the two sides. A further EU-India summit took place online in July 2020; a new roadmap on the EU-India strategic partnership was adopted, to guide and strengthen bilateral co-operation until 2025. An EU-India High-Level Dialogue on Trade and Investment was initiated in February 2021. At a summit held in Porto, Portugal, in May, the EU and India agreed to resume talks on the negotiation of both a trade agreement and to launch negotiations on a separate investment protection agreement; negotiations began in June 2022. In February 2023 an EU-India Trade and Technology Council was established. In September 2021 the European Commission published a new EU strategy for increased co-operation in the Indo-Pacific region, including India.</p>
                    <p>A new accord with Sri Lanka entered into force in 1995. In August 2010 the EU temporarily withheld certain trade preferences for Sri Lanka, after an investigation confirmed that three UN conventions relating to human rights had failed to be implemented fully. In November 2015 the EU welcomed the progress made in Sri Lanka towards democracy and the country’s increased engagement with the international community, although in mid-2021 the European Parliament (EP) expressed concerns about reports of increasing human rights violations in Sri Lanka. The EU has provided support for democracy and peace in Nepal, which formally abolished the monarchy in May 2008. Co-operation focused on three principal areas: education; stability and peacebuilding; and trade and strengthening of economic capacity building. In 2024–25 the EU allocated humanitarian assistance totalling some €4m. to Nepal to assist its response to natural hazards and for disaster preparedness; by that time, humanitarian funding to Nepal since 2001 had reached some €124m. The EU and Nepal agreed a Multi-annual Indicative Programme for 2021–27, supporting development objectives under the country’s National Development Plan.</p>
                    <p>
          A draft co-operation agreement was initialled with Pakistan in April 1998, however, this was suspended following a military coup in October 1999. Political dialogue with Pakistan recommenced on an ad hoc basis in November 2000; the co-operation agreement was signed in November 2001 and entered into force in April 2004. The first EU-Pakistan summit was held in June 2009. In March 2012 the EU and Pakistan endorsed a five-year EU-Pakistan engagement plan, which aimed to promote peace and stability in the region. An EU-Pakistan strategic engagement plan was signed in June 2019, providing a comprehensive framework for political co-operation in the areas of, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , security, democracy, the rule of law, human rights, migration, trade and investment, sustainable development, education, culture, and science and technology.
        </p>
                    <p>
                         
          A co-operation accord with Bangladesh (replacing a 1976 agreement) was signed in May 2000 and came into force in March 2001. The EU pledged development aid worth up to €690m. to Bangladesh during 2014–20. In August 2020 the EU provided emergency aid amounting to some €100,000 to Bangladesh, in response to severe floods that had affected almost one-third of the country. In October 2021 the EU and Bangladesh agreed to launch a new political dialogue during 2022, the first being held in November in Dhaka, Bangladesh, at which the EU offered to begin discussions on a partnership co-operation agreement.
          
                    </p>
                    <p>
          The EU pledged assistance for the reconstruction of Afghanistan following the removal of the Taliban regime in late 2001
          
          . In November 2005 the EU and Afghanistan adopted a joint declaration on a new partnership aimed at promoting Afghanistan’s political and economic development and strengthening EU-Afghan relations. The EU pledged €1,030m. in development assistance to Afghanistan during 2007–13. Assistance provided by the EU focused on the principal areas of concern identified in the National Development Strategy for Afghanistan, adopted in mid-2008, which included strengthening the judicial system; rural development, to combat narcotics production by promoting alternatives to poppy cultivation; and supporting the health sector. In October 2009 a Plan for Enhanced EU Engagement in Afghanistan and Pakistan was approved by EU ministers responsible for foreign affairs. In June 2014 a new strategy for engagement with Afghanistan until the end of 2016 was agreed, which focused on strengthening Afghanistan’s institutions. In October 2016 the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan was held, at which the EU agreed its first statebuilding contract for Afghanistan, providing direct budgetary support for the Government, in the context of a new Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework. In February 2017 a Co-operation Agreement on Partnership and Development (CAPD) was signed in Munich, Germany, by the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the Minister of Finance of Afghanistan. The CAPD provisionally entered into force from December. Meanwhile, in June the EU appointed a Special Envoy to Afghanistan. A new EU Strategy for Afghanistan was approved in October, and in August 2018 the EU approved a roadmap for engagement with civil society in Afghanistan during 2018–20. At an international conference on Afghanistan, held in Geneva, Switzerland, in November 2020, the EU announced long-term and emergency assistance totalling some €1,200m. during 2021–25. In June 2021 the EP expressed concerns about the security situation in Afghanistan, following the decision to withdraw all US and North Atlantic Treaty Organization troops from the country by 11 September. After the Taliban took control of Afghanistan in mid-August, the EU suspended development aid to Afghanistan (but not humanitarian aid, to which it allocated a package of €142.8m. in November 2023, in addition to €80m. announced in October) and announced its intention to maintain `operational engagement’ with the regime (which did not, however, imply official recognition of the new Government).
        </p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>