<int-org-sectref id="SL2883806" int-org-sectrefdtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="2883805" slsdocid="2883803" slsdocty="int-org-section int-org-sectrefdtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-section id="IO-EU.1267209785" id-root="io-eu" iso="io-eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio eerca">
                    <heading>Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia</heading>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.210" usage="ewyb edio eerca">
          The EU is a shareholder in the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (
          <xr pageref="N">EBRD</xr>
          ), which began operations in 1991 to promote investment in Eastern Europe. The EC established the Technical Assistance to the Commonwealth of Independent States (TACIS) programme, also in 1991, to promote the development of market economies and to foster democracy in the countries of the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR)—and Mongolia. Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania (now EU member states) withdrew from TACIS in 1992.
        </p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.21063" usage="ewyb edio eerca">
          In March 2003 the European Commission launched a European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) with the aim of enhancing co-operation with countries adjacent to the enlarged Union. A new European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument (ENPI) replaced TACIS and MEDA (which was concerned with EU co-operation with Medi­terranean countries) from 2007. All countries covered by the ENP (Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, Ukraine and several Mediterranean countries) were eligible for support under the ENPI. From 2014 the ENPI was replaced by the European Neighbourhood Instrument, and for the period 2021–27 several funding programmes were absorbed into the new Neighbourhood, Development and International Cooperation Instrument
          
          —Global Europe.
        </p>
                    <p>In May 2009 the Governments of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine, and the EU issued a joint declaration on establishing an Eastern Partnership. The Eastern Partnership (facilitated through the ENP) aimed, through support for reforms in partner countries, to accelerate political association and further economic integration with the EU. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020–21, the EU provided funding in support of the health sector and in order to assist in the social and economic recovery of the countries of the Eastern Partnership.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.211" usage="ewyb edio eerca">In 1992 EU heads of government decided to replace the agreement on trade and economic co-operation that had been concluded with the USSR in 1989 with new Partnership and Co-operation Agreements (PCAs), providing a framework for closer political, cultural and economic relations between the EU and the former republics of the USSR. An Interim Agreement with the Russian Federation on trade came into effect in February 1996, and a PCA with Russia came into effect in December 1997. In June 1999 the EU adopted a Common Strategy on Russia, which aimed to promote the consolidation of democracy and the rule of law; the integration of Russia into the common European economic and social space; and regional stability and security. Relations with Russia were strained by its opposition to EU enlargement. In May 2004, at a bilateral summit held in the Russian capital, Moscow, the EU agreed to support Russia’s membership of the World Trade Organization, following Russia’s extension in April of its PCA with the EU to 10 accession states. Agreements on visa facilitation and on readmission were signed at an EU-Russia summit held in Sochi, Russia, in May 2006. In July the Commission approved draft negotiating directives for a new EU-Russia Agreement to replace the PCA, which expired in December 2007. No such agreement was concluded, and the PCA was renewed on an annual basis. However, regular bilateral talks with Russia were suspended from 2014, owing to Russia’s involvement in the conflict in eastern Ukraine—see below. Moreover, Russian military involvement in the Syrian Arab Republic from September 2015, as well as campaigns of disinformation, also resulted in increased tensions. The EU’s East StratCom Task Force was established in March of that year to combat Russian disinformation. Sanctions against Russia (see below) were repeatedly renewed. In February 2021 the EU’s High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy visited Moscow, where talks were held on issues including the alleged state-sanctioned poisoning of Russian opposition figure Aleksei Navalnyi and his subsequent arrest; during the course of the visit, the expulsion of three EU diplomats from Russia was announced. In June the European Commission and the High Representative published a joint statement on EU-Russia relations, identifying its intention to `push back, constrain and engage with’ Russia, by responding to human rights violations and breaches of international law (through the imposition of restrictive measures if deemed appropriate), by countering attempts to undermine EU values, and by engaging with Russia where necessary, and in line with EU interests.</p>
                    <p id="WB02048.IO.TXT.213" usage="ewyb edio eerca">In February 1994 the EU Council of Ministers agreed to pursue closer economic and political relations with Ukraine, after it agreed to renounce control of nuclear weapons on its territory. A PCA came into effect in March 1998. In December 1999 the EU adopted a Common Strategy on Ukraine, aimed at developing a strategic partnership on the basis of the PCA. In November 2005 an EU Border Assistance Mission to monitor Ukraine’s border with Moldova was launched at the request of both countries’ Governments (although initially deployed for a period of two years, the mission is ongoing). An EU-Ukraine Association Agreement was initialled in March 2012, and a separate Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement (DCFTA) was concluded in July. In November Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych decided to sign neither the Association Agreement nor the accompanying agreement on free trade, prompting large-scale protests in the Ukrainian capital Kyiv, which continued into early 2014. In February EU ministers responsible for foreign affairs voted to impose sanctions against senior Ukrainian officials, after more than 75 people were reportedly killed by security forces during action to remove demonstrators from central Kyiv. After Yanukovych’s removal from office in February, in March EU ministers responsible for foreign affairs condemned the violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty by Russian armed forces, and in mid-March the EU imposed asset freezes and visa restrictions against senior Russian officials. The EU condemned a referendum held in the Ukrainian territory of Crimea in mid-March, the results of which supported its annexation by Russia, in contravention of the Ukrainian Constitution. The EU has maintained a non-recognition policy with respect to the annexation of Crimea by Russia.</p>
                    <p>In March 2014 the political provisions of the Association Agreement were signed by the EU and Ukraine; the remainder of the Agreement was signed in June, and parts of the agreement were provisionally applied in November. Meanwhile, in May EU ministers responsible for foreign affairs agreed to impose broader sanctions against those deemed to be threatening Ukrainian sovereignty. In June the Council agreed to establish a Common Security and Defence Policy mission, the EU Advisory Mission for Civilian Security Sector Reform. In July the EU expressed concern at the continuing violence in eastern Ukraine, and subsequently extended the scope of the restrictive measures in place against Russia. Further sanctions were adopted in late July, following the shooting down of a Malaysian Airlines aeroplane over Donetsk in mid-July, and in September. In January 2015 the European Commission offered lending worth some €1,800m. to Ukraine, in support of its programme of reforms. The DCFTA, which formed part of the Association Agreement signed in 2014, entered into effect from January 2016. The Association Agreement was finally ratified by the Netherlands (the last EU member state to do so) in May 2017, and in July the Council approved the deal with Ukraine, thereby permitting its full implementation from September.</p>
                    <p usage="ewyb edio eerca">
          A PCA with Belarus was signed in March 1995, but ratification by EU member states was suspended in February 1997. EU technical assistance programmes were also suspended, with the exception of aid programmes and those considered to be directly beneficial to the democratic process. Restrictive measures pertaining to Belarus were renewed in October 2012, October 2013 and October 2014. An EU-Belarus Human Rights Dialogue resumed, on an annual basis, in July 2015. In February 2016 the EU decided not to renew restrictive measures against 170 people and three companies, owing to the more positive political environment, although other sanctions, including an arms embargo, were retained. In January 2014 the EU and Belarus initiated negotiations on a visa facilitation and readmission agreement, which was signed in January 2020. It was partially suspended in November 2021. In February 2020 the restrictive measures in place against Belarus were renewed. In mid-August, following the contested re-election of President Alyaksandr Lukashenka and the subsequent violent suppression of protests, the European Council announced plans to impose sanctions on senior Belarusian officials. Sanctions were imposed in October, and strengthened in both November and December, with the introduction of a travel ban and the freezing of assets. Following the hijacking in Belarus of a passenger flight carrying opposition journalist Raman Pratasyevich in May 2021, and his subsequent arrest, the European Council banned Belarusian aircraft from EU airspace. New economic sanctions against Belarus were adopted by EU ministers in June. Sanctions were broadened in November, and new sanctions were imposed in December in response to human rights abuses and claims of the manipulation of migrants for political purposes (Belarus had been accused of purposefully sending migrants to the Baltic states and Poland as part of a `hybrid warfare’ campaign). Sanctions were renewed in February 2022, and new sanctions were imposed in March in response to Belarus’s role in facilitating the Russian invasion of Ukraine in late February. Sanctions were prolonged for a further year from February 2023, and were in February 2024 prolonged for a further year until February 2025; meanwhile, new sanctions were imposed in August 2023.
          
                    </p>
                    <p>
          At the beginning of February 2022, amid the build-up of Russian troops on the border with Ukraine, the Commission adopted a proposal on the provision of emergency assistance to Ukraine, providing for lending of up to €1,200m. to be disbursed in two equal instalments. After Russia launched large-scale military action on 24 February, the EU announced that it was to finance the purchase and delivery of weaponry and other equipment to Ukraine under the European Peace Facility (EPF), at a cost of some €450m., the first time that the EU had agreed to provide such military support to a country involved in conflict (funding to Ukraine under the EPF was subsequently substantially increased, and had reached some €6,100m. by the end of 2023). A European military assistance mission for Ukraine (EUMAM Ukraine) was established in October 2022 for an initial two-year period of operation. The EU had introduced sanctions against Russia on 23 February, when that country recognized the independence of Donestsk and Luhansk in the Donbas, and sanctions were progressively tightened over subsequent days. Flights by Russian carriers (including private jets) were banned, a number of Russian banks were removed from the SWIFT international payments system, and two Russian state-owned media providers were prohibited from operating in EU member states. Ukraine submitted an application for EU membership on 28 February, and Georgia and Moldova formally applied for membership on 3 March. In late June the European Council awarded candidate status to Moldova and Ukraine, and agreed in December 2023 to start accession negotiations with both countries. Candidate status was granted to Georgia in the same month. Meanwhile, in early April 2022 the Council condemned the reported murder of civilians by the Russian armed forces in Ukraine, and a fifth package of restrictive measures was introduced, which notably banned the import of Russian coal with effect from August. A sixth package of measures was adopted on 3 June, which, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , introduced a partial ban on the purchase and transport of crude oil from Russia over a period of six to eight months (imports by pipeline to member states that were geographically most dependent on Russian oil imports, such as Hungary, were temporarily exempted from the embargo). On 12 July the Council agreed to provide €1,000m. in macrofinancial assistance (MFA) to Ukraine; total MFA to Ukraine consequently totalled €2,200m. since the beginning of the conflict. A macrofinancial assistance plus (MFA+) instrument worth up to €18,000m. in highly concessional loans was proposed by the Commission in November, which would be disbursed in regular instalments during 2023 to assist Ukraine in the provision of essential public services and in the restoration of infrastructure (the first instalment of €3,000m. was disbursed in January)
          
           . Disbursements were to be conditional on Ukraine introducing institutional reforms. A new Ukraine Facility for the `recovery, reconstruction and modernisation of Ukraine’ was proposed by the Commission in June 2023, worth €50,000m. in grants and loans in 2024–27. Meanwhile, In late July the EU adopted a new `maintenance and alignment’ package of measures, reinforcing existing sanctions, and introducing a ban on Russian gold imports. The package emphasized that EU sanctions did not target trade in agricultural products between Russia and other non-EU states. Economic sanctions against Russia were renewed on 26 July for a further six months. Further packages of restrictive measures were introduced. In early October, 
          <i>inter alia, </i>
          additional restrictions on trade and services with Russia were outlined. In November the Council adopted a decision that would add the violation of restrictive measures to the list of `EU crimes’ in the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU. On 3 December the EU agreed a price cap on Russian crude and petroleum oils of US $60 per barrel. A ninth package of sanctions was introduced in December, which included a ban on transactions with the Russian Regional Development Bank, the suspension of several Russian media providers’ broadcasting licenses in the EU and sanctions against a further 141 individuals and 49 entities (including certain banks and political parties). A 10th package of sanctions was introduced in February 2023 targeting trade and exports of technology. Also in February the EU, along with the Group of Seven industrialized countries and Australia, capped certain refined petroleum products such as diesel, gasoline and jet fuel from Russia at $100 per barrel, while fuel oil was capped at $45 per barrel. An 11th package of sanctions was introduced in June, targeting the circumvention of sanctions by third countries, and a 12th package of sanctions was agreed in December, including a ban on imports, purchases or transfers of diamonds from Russia, with effect from 1 March 2024.
          
                         
                         
                    </p>
                    <p id="EU.IO.EERCA.16">
          In July 1998 a PCA with Moldova entered into force. In September 2012 the Council removed sanctions previously imposed on the authorities in the disputed Transnistria region of Moldova, owing to progress made by the new political leadership in negotiations. PCAs with the majority of the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States had entered into force by 1 July 1999, with the exception of Belarus and Turkmenistan (with which a PCA was signed in 1998 but not ratified); a PCA with Tajikistan was signed in October 2004 and entered into force in January 2010. In mid-2013 the EU completed negotiations on DCFTAs with Armenia, Georgia and Moldova, as part of negotiations on new Association Agreements with those countries, which were intended to supersede their PCAs. In September the Armenian Government announced its intention to join a customs union, at that time comprising Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan, and consequently the Association Agreement negotiated with that country was not initialled. In June 2014 Association Agreements, which provided for the gradual introduction of a DCFTA, were signed with Georgia and Moldova; the agreements fully entered into force in July 2016. An EU Partnership Mission in Moldova was launched, at the request of Moldova’s Government, in May 2023, to assist in the strengthening of the security sector in the country, including against threats such as cybersecurity and foreign information manipulation and interference
          
           . Meanwhile, a visa facilitation and readmission agreement with Georgia was concluded in 2011, and in 2013 three agreements were reached with Azerbaijan on visa facilitation, readmission and mobility. In February 2017 talks commenced with Azerbaijan with the aim of negotiating a new framework agreement to encourage increased political dialogue and co-operation. In November an EU-Armenia Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement was signed, which entered into force in March 2021. In January 2023 the Council agreed to establish a civilian European Union Mission in Armenia, initially for a two-year period, with the aim of contributing to stability in border areas and to EU mediation efforts between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
          
                         
                    </p>
                    <p>
          In June 2007 the European Council adopted a Strategy for a New Partnership, which aimed to develop co-operation with Central Asia. In November 2013 the European Commission announced plans to provide funds worth some €1,000m. to Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan under its Development Co-operation Instrument for 2014–20. In December 2015 the EU and Kazakhstan signed an Enhanced PCA (EPCA). Negotiations on an EPCA with Kyrgyzstan commenced in December 2017, and the agreement was initialled in July 2019. Negotiations on an EPCA with Uzbekistan were initiated in November 2018 and were completed in July 2022. Negotiations on an EPCA with Tajikistan began in February 2023. In June 2019 the Council adopted conclusions on a new strategy for Central Asia, and endorsed a joint communication by the High Representative and the European Commission, entitled The EU and Central Asia: New Opportunities for a Stronger Partnership; together these set out a new framework for engagement with the region, with policy to focus on resilience, prosperity and regional co-operation.
          
                    </p>
                    <p id="EU.IO.EERCA.13" usage="eerca">The EU’s Northern Dimension programme is co-financed, and the EU, Iceland, Norway and Russia were equal partners. It aims to address the specific challenges of the Baltic Sea, Arctic Sea and north-west Russian regions and to encourage co-operation with external states. At a Northern Dimension summit meeting held in Helsinki, Finland, in November 2006 the leaders of the EU, Iceland, Norway and Russia endorsed a new Policy Framework Document and Northern Dimension Political Declaration. Priorities were identified as: the environment; transport and logistics; health and social wellbeing; and culture. (Observer status was granted to Canada and the USA at that time.) Following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 the EU, Iceland and Norway agreed to suspend all activities involving Russia or Belarus (an observer member of the Northern Dimension).</p>
                    <p usage="eerca">
          The EU Baltic Sea region comprises eight countries (Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Sweden). The EU’s first macro-regional strategy, the EU Strategy for the Baltic Sea Region (EUSBSR), was approved by the European Council in 2009. The EUSBSR aims to provide a framework for improving environmental conditions in the region, helping transportation flows, and improving networks for energy and research and innovation, as well as aiding the development of cross-border competition. The EUSBSR’s current 2021–27 action plan focuses on three objectives: Save the Sea; connecting the region; and increasing prosperity. The Interreg Baltic Sea Region programme (which includes Norway) was adopted in mid-2022 with priority areas in climate change, water, `innovative societies’ and regional co-operation
          
           .
        </p>
               </int-org-section>
          </int-org-sectref>