<?xml version="1.0"?>
<chronology id="ASS.CHRON.1" id-root="ass.chron" original-filename="unknown" region="ASS" usage="ass" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
     <heading>Political Events in Africa South of the Sahara, 2022–23</heading>
     <alt-heading usage="ass">Political Events 2022–23</alt-heading>
     <gen-section id="ASS.CHRON.3.11204663301" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF" usage="ass">
          <heading>October 2022</heading>
          <chron-list>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>2</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Tanzania</b>
           President Samia Suluhu Hassan effected a reorganization of the Cabinet in which Stergomena Lawrence Tax, hitherto Minister of Defence and National Service, was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs and East African Co-operation, and was in turn replaced by Innocent Bashungwa, hitherto Minister of State in the President’s Office, in charge of Regional Administration and Local Government.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>6</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Burkina Faso</b>
           Capt. Ibrahim Traoré was declared Transitional President following a military coup on 30 September.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>7</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Lesotho</b>
           Legislative elections were held, at which the Revolution for Prosperity (RFP) won 56 of the 120 seats in the National Assembly, while the Democratic Congress secured 26 seats. The All Basotho Convention and the Basotho Action Party took eight and six seats, respectively. On 28 October the RFP leader, Ntsokoane Samuel Matekane, was sworn in as Prime Minister.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>10</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Chad</b>
           The President of the Conseil Militaire de Transition, Gen. Mahamat Idriss Déby, was inaugurated as Transitional President. On 14 October a new `national unity’ Government was announced, led by Saleh Kebzabo and including several members of the opposition and former rebels.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>18</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Madagascar</b>
           Richard Randriamandrato was dismissed as Minister of Foreign Affairs.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>21</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Burkina Faso</b>
           Traoré was formally inaugurated. Apollinaire Joachim Kyélem de Tambéla was appointed Prime Minister. A new Government was announced on 25 October. Among the new appointments were those of Col-Maj. Kassoum Coulibaly as Minister of State, Minister of Defence and War Veterans and Aboubacar Nacanabo as Minister of the Economy, Finance and Forecasting.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>21</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Cabo Verde</b>
           Filomena Gonçalves, hitherto Minister of the Presidency of the Council of Ministers and of Parliamentary Affairs, was appointed Minister of Health, succeeding Arlindo do Rosário, who had been named as Cabo Verde’s ambassador to the People’s Republic of China. Dr Janine Tatiana Santos Lélis assumed Gonçalves’ former portfolio, while also remaining as Minister of State for Defence and Territorial Cohesion.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>25</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Malawi</b>
           President Lazarus Chakwera dismissed Minister of Agriculture Lobin Lowe on grounds of incompetency and appointed Sam Kawale as his replacement.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>27</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Guinea-Bissau</b>
           In a reorganization of the Council of Ministers Sandji Fati was appointed Minister of State for the Interior and Public Order, while his immediate predecessor, Botche Candé, became Minister of State for Agriculture and Rural Development. Candé had come under pressure to resign over the interior ministry’s alleged involvement in drug trafficking networks.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>27</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Kenya</b>
           Musalia Mudavadi and Alfred Mutua were sworn in as Prime Cabinet Secretary and Secretary for Foreign and Diaspora Affairs, respectively.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
          </chron-list>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.CHRON.3.11204663361" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF" usage="ass">
          <heading>November 2022</heading>
          <chron-list>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>2</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Ethiopia</b>
           African Union-led peace talks between the Government of Ethiopia and the Tigray People’s Liberation Front concluded with the signing of the Pretoria Peace Agreement.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>2</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha</b>
           Simon Minshull became Administrator of Ascension.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>4</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Lesotho</b>
           Prime Minister Matekane installed a new Cabinet. Most notably, Nthomeng Majara, the erstwhile Chief Justice of Lesotho was appointed as the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Justice, Law and Parliamentary Affairs, while the former central bank governor Retšelisitsoe Matlanyane became Minister of Finance and Development Planning, and Mpotjoane Lejone took over as Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Relations. Matekane himself assumed responsibility for the defence, national security and environment portfolio.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>8</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Burkina Faso</b>
           Recently appointed Minister of Industrial Development, Trade, Handicrafts and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises Roch Donatien Nagalo resigned his post following allegations of corruption and embezzlement. He was replaced by Serge Gnaniodem Poda on the following day. In a further change to the composition of the Government, Mikailou Sidibé was named as Minister of Town Planning, Land Affairs and Housing, succeeding Yacouba Die.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>9–10</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>São Tomé and Príncipe (STP)</b>
           Following legislative elections on 25 September, at which the Acção Democrática Independente (ADI) won a majority, President Carlos Vila Nova dismissed the Movimento de Libertação de São Tomé e Príncipe—Partido Social Democrata (MLSTP—PSD)-led Government of Prime Minister Jorge Bom Jesus. On the following day Patrice Trovoada, the leader of the ADI, was appointed Prime Minister. A new Government was announced on 14 November, in which Jorge Amado (MLSTP—PSD) retained the defence and internal administration portfolio, while Ginésio Valentim Afonso da Mata became Minister of Planning, Finance and the Blue Economy.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>18</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Guinea</b>
           Transitional President Col Mamady Doumbouya carried out a reorganization of the Council of Ministers, in which Rose Pola Pricemou, hitherto Minister of Trade, Industry and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises, was appointed Minister of Planning and International Co-operation. She was replaced in her former post by Louopou Lamah, the former Minister of the Environment and Sustainable Development. The environment and sustainable development portfolio was reassigned to Safiatou Diallo.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>20</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Equatorial Guinea</b>
           Presidential and legislative elections took place. In the former, incumbent President Gen. (retd) Obiang Nguema Mbasogo (Partido Democrático de Guinea Ecuatorial—PDGE) was declared the winner, having secured 97.0% of the valid votes cast. The PDGE took all 100 seats in the Chamber of Deputies and all 55 elective seats in the Senate.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
          </chron-list>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.CHRON.3.11204663391" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF" usage="ass">
          <heading>December 2022</heading>
          <chron-list>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>5</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Mali</b>
           Prime Minister Dr Choguel Kokala Maïga, who had been on medical leave for several months, resumed his post.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>23</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Togo</b>
           President Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé dismissed the Minister of the Armed Forces, Essossimna Marguerite Gnakadè, from his post and brought the ministry under the control of the Presidency.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>28</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)</b>
           Three members of the Government announced their resignations.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
          </chron-list>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.CHRON.3.11204663411" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF" usage="ass">
          <heading>January 2023</heading>
          <chron-list>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>8</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Benin</b>
           Legislative elections were held, at which the Union Progressiste le Renouveau won 53 of the 109 seats in the expanded National Assembly, while the Bloc Républicain and Les Démocrates each secured 28 seats.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>9</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Gabon</b>
           President Ali Bongo Ondimba appointed the hitherto Prime Minister, Rose Christiane Ossouka Raponda, to the newly created post of Vice-President. She was replaced as Prime Minister by Alain Claude Bilie-By-Nze. A new Council of Ministers, in which key ministers retained their portfolios, was subsequently appointed.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>20</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Ethiopia</b>
           Prime Minister Dr Abiy Ahmed Ali reorganized the Council of Ministers.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>20</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Gabon</b>
           Minister of Foreign Affairs Michael Moussa Adamo died after suffering a cardiac arrest.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>31</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Equatorial Guinea</b>
           President Obiang Nguema appointed Manuela Roka Botey as Prime Minister, and on 2 February made further changes to the Council of Ministers. Among the new appointees were Fortunato Ofa Mbo Nchama as Minister of Finance and the Budget, Sergio Esono Abeso Tomo as Minister of Justice, Religion and Penitentiary Institutions, and Antonio Oburu Ondó as Minister of Mines and Hydrocarbons.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>31</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Malawi</b>
           President Chakwera effected a major reorganization of the Cabinet, appointing, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , Harry Mkandawire as Minister of Defence and Ken Zikhale Ng’oma as Minister of Homeland Security.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
          </chron-list>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.CHRON.3.11204663431" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF" usage="ass">
          <heading>February 2023</heading>
          <chron-list>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>24</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Djibouti</b>
           At legislative elections the Union pour la Majorité Présidentielle—a coalition comprising the Front pour la Restauration de l’Unité et de la Démocratie, the Parti National Démocratique, the Parti Social Démocrate and the Rassemblement Populaire pour le Progrès—won 58 of the 65 seats in the National Assembly. The Union pour la Démocratie et la Justice took the remaining seven seats.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>25</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Nigeria</b>
           A general election took place. In the presidential election Bola Ahmed Adekunle Tinubu of the All Progressives Congress (APC) won, with 36.6% of the vote. His nearest challengers, Atiku Abubakar of the People’s Democratic Party (PDP) and Peter Gregory Obi of the Labour Party, received 29.1% and 25.4%, respectively. In the legislative elections the APC won 180 of the 360 seats in the National Assembly and 59 of the 109 seats in the Senate, while the PDP took 114 and 36 seats, respectively. Tinubu was inaugurated as President on 29 April.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>26</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Chad</b>
           Transitional President Déby appointed Mahamat Charfadine Margui as Minister of Public Security and Immigration.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>28</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>South Africa</b>
           Deputy President David Mabuza announced his resignation. On 7 March Paul Mashatile was appointed as his replacement, and, as part of a wider reorganization of the Cabinet, Kgosientsho Ramokgopa was appointed to the newly-created position of Minister in the Presidency, responsible for Electricity, and tasked with resolving the country’s ongoing power generation crisis.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
          </chron-list>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.CHRON.3.11204663451" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF" usage="ass">
          <heading>March 2023</heading>
          <chron-list>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>3</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>South Sudan</b>
           President Lt-Gen. Salva Kiir Mayardit dismissed Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs Angelina Teny and Minister of the Interior Mahmoud Solomon Agook. On 8 March the President also removed Mayiik Ayii Deng from his post as Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation and reassigned the portfolio on an acting basis to Deng Dau Malek. On 29 March Gen. Chol Thon Balok was appointed as Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>9</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Guinea-Bissau</b>
           A minor government reorganization was effected. Soares Sambú replaced Sandji Fati as Minister of State for the Interior and Public Order, while Malal Sané was appointed Minister of State of the Council of Ministers and Parliamentary Affairs.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>12</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Cameroon</b>
           Indirect elections were held to the 70 elective seats in the Senate, all of which were won by the ruling Rassemblement Démocratique du Peuple Camerounais. President Paul Biya appointed a further 30 members on 31 March.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>23</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>DRC</b>
           President Félix Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo effected a substantial reorganization of the Council of Ministers. Jean-Pierre Bemba Gombo was appointed Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of National Defence and War Veterans, while Peter Kazadi Kankonde was named as Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of the Interior, Security and Traditional Affairs. Other notable appointments included Judith Tsuminwa Tuluka as Minister of State, Minister of Planning and Marc Ekila Likombo as Minister of Transport, Communication Routes and Improving Access to Isolated Regions.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
          </chron-list>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.CHRON.3.11204663471" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF" usage="ass">
          <heading>April 2023</heading>
          <chron-list>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>15</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Sudan</b>
           Violent conflict erupted between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the paramilitary Rapid Support Forces (RSF) following months of tension between Gen. Abdel Fattah al-Burhan Abdelrahman (Chairman of the Sovereign Council) and Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo `Hemedti’ (Deputy Chairman of the Sovereign Council). Alleged sources of disagreement included the method of integration of the paramilitary RSF—which Dagalo commanded—into the Sudanese army and the ranks of RSF officers in the future hierarchy of this integrated army.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>17</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Benin</b>
           President Patrice Talon implemented changes to the Council of Ministers, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , replacing Sévérin Quenum with Yvon Détchénou as Keeper of the Seals, Minister of Justice and Legislation.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
          </chron-list>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.CHRON.3.11204663491" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF" usage="ass">
          <heading>May 2023</heading>
          <chron-list>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>9</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Guinea</b>
           Doumbouya announced a minor reorganization of the Council of Ministers, appointing Ibrahima Kalil Condé as Minister of Urban Planning, Housing and Land Management, in charge of the Recovery of Occupied State Lands. The erstwhile portfolio holder, Ibrahima Sory Bangoura, was named as Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>13</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Mauritania</b>
           At legislative elections (with a second round held on 27 May) the ruling Parti El Insaf won 107 of the 176 seats in the National Assembly, while the Union pour la Démocratie et le Progrès and the Rassemblement National pour la Réforme et le Développement (Tawassoul) each secured 10 seats. The Front Republicain pour l’Unité et la Démocratie won seven seats, and the Alliance Nationale Démocratique and the Parti El Islah each took six seats.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
          </chron-list>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.CHRON.3.11204663501" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF" usage="ass">
          <heading>June 2023</heading>
          <chron-list>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>4</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Guinea-Bissau</b>
           In legislative elections, the coalition Plataforma Aliança Inclusiva-Terra Ranka won 54 of the 102 seats in the Assembleia Nacional Popular. The Movimento para a Alternãncia Democrática and the Partido para a Renovação Social secured 29 and 12 seats, respectively.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>5</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Rwanda</b>
           President Maj.-Gen. Paul Kagame reorganized the Cabinet; Juvenal Marizamunda replaced Maj.-Gen. Albert Murasira as Minister of Defence.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>6</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Angola</b>
           President João Lourenço dismissed Minister of State for Economic Co-ordination Manuel José Nunes Júnior, reassigning the portfolio to José de Lima Massano, hitherto Governor of the central bank.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>6</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Benin</b>
           Olushegun Adjadi Bakari replaced Aurélien Amah Agbenonci as Minister of Foreign Affairs.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>18</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Mali</b>
           At a national referendum, 96.9% of the participating electorate approved a new Constitution, which, following its promulgation on 22 July, replaced that of 1992.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>24</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Sierra Leone</b>
           A general election took place. At the presidential election incumbent Brig. (retd) Julius Maada Bio (of the Sierra Leone People’s Party—SLPP) was declared the winner, with 56.2% of the valid votes cast. His nearest rival, Samura Matthew Wilson Kamara (representing the All-People’s Congress—APC), received 41.2% of the vote. In the legislative elections the SLPP won 81 of the 135 seats in the Parliament, while the APC secured 54 seats. Bio was sworn in on 28 June
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>25</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Burkina Faso</b>
           Transitional President Traoré reorganized the Council of Ministers, replacing four ministers.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
          </chron-list>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.CHRON.3.11204663521" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF" usage="ass">
          <heading>July 2023</heading>
          <chron-list>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>1</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Mali</b>
           Transitional President Col Assimi Goïta implemented a major reorganization of the Council of Ministers, appointing 16 new ministers, although the holders of the key portfolios remained unchanged. 
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>4</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Mauritania</b>
           A new Council of Ministers was announced under the continued premiership of Mohamed Ould Bilal. While the key portfolios were retained by the previous incumbents, new appointments included Abdessalam Ould Mohamed Saleh as Minister of the Economy and Sustainable Development, Moctar Ould Dahi as Minister of National Education and the Reform of the Education System, and Naha Mint Hamdy Ould Mouknass as Minister of Health.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>5</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Zambia</b>
           President Hakainde Hichilema dismissed Derricky Chilundika as the provincial minister for Luapula, amid allegations of his involvement in illegal mining activities.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>10</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Sierra Leone</b>
           President Bio announced initial ministerial appointments, with Dr David Moinina Sengeh as Chief Minister, replacing Jacob Jusu Saffa. The erstwhile Minister of Mines and Mineral Resources, Timothy Musa Kabba, was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation. Sheku Ahmed Fantamadi Bangura was retained as Minister of Finance. Bio made further nominations, to complete the Cabinet, on 15 July.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>13</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Angola</b>
           President Lourenço dismissed Victor Francisco dos Santos Fernandes as the Minister of Industry and Commerce; he was replaced by Rui Miguêns de Oliveira.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>26</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Niger</b>
           President Mohamed Bazoum was detained by members of the Presidential Guard. Later that day an air force officer, Col-Maj. Amadou Abdramane, announced the removal of Bazoum from office and the creation of a new ruling body, the Conseil National pour la Sauvegarde de la Patrie (CNSP). On 28 July Gen. Abdourahamane Tchiani declared himself Head of State and President of the CNSP.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>30</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Central African Republic</b>
           About 95.3% of votes cast in a referendum approved a new Constitution, which, upon its promulgation on 30 August, replaced the 2015 Constitution. Among the new provisions was the introduction of a seven-year presidential mandate with no term limit.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
          </chron-list>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.CHRON.3.11204663581" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF" usage="ass">
          <heading>August 2023</heading>
          <chron-list>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>3</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>South Sudan</b>
           In a reorganization of the Council of Ministers Dr Bak Barnaba Chol Bak was appointed Minister of Finance and Economic Planning, replacing Dier Tong Ngor.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>7</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Guinea-Bissau</b>
           Following the June legislative elections, President Umaro Sissoco Embaló appointed Geraldo João Martins as Prime Minister, replacing Nuno Gomes Nabian. A new Government, comprising 19 ministers and 15 secretaries of state, was named on 12 August. Among the most notable changes, Carlos Pinto Pereira became Minister of Foreign Affairs, International Co-operation and Communities, while Adiatu Djaló Nandigna was named as Minister of the Interior. Nicolau dos Santos took the national defence portfolio, while Suleimane Seidi was appointed Minister of the Economy and Finance.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>7</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Niger</b>
           The CNSP named Ali Mahaman Lamine Zeine as Prime Minister. On 9 August the CNSP announced a new, 21-member Government comprising both civilians and members of the military. Prime Minister Lamine Zeine took the economy and finance portfolio, Gen Salifou Mody was appointed Minister of State, Minister of National Defence, while Brig.-Gen. Mohamed Toumba was named as Minister of State, Minister of the Interior, Public Security and Territorial Administration.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>8</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>STP</b>
           Following the resignation of Alberto Neto Pereira as Minister of Foreign Affairs, Co-operation and Communities, the Minister of the Presidency of the Council of Ministers and Parliamentary Affairs, Gareth Haddad do Espírito Santo Guadalupe, additionally assumed the portfolio, in an acting capacity.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>20</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>The Republic of the Congo</b>
           At senatorial elections the Parti Congolais du Travail won 52 of the 72 seats in the Senate, while the Rassemblement pour la Démocratie et le Progrès Social secured three seats. The Club 2002-Parti pour l’Unité et la République and the Mouvement Action et Renouveau took two seats each.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>21</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Nigeria</b>
           President Tinubu swore into office a new, 45-member Cabinet. Mohammed Badaru Abubakar was appointed Minister of Defence, while Wale Edun was named as Minister of Finance and Co-ordinating Minister of the Economy. Bunmi Tunji-Ojo became Minister of the Interior and Yusuf M. Tuggar was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>22</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Rwanda</b>
           President Kagame implemented a reorganization of the Cabinet. Gaspard Twagirayezu, hitherto Minister of State for Education, was appointed Minister of Education. He was replaced by Claudette Irere as Minister of State in the Ministry of Education. Dr Valentine Uwamariya was named as Minister of Gender and Family Promotion, while Prof. Jeannette Bayisenge became Minister of Public Service and Labour.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>24</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Zimbabwe</b>
           A presidential election was held concurrently with elections to the National Assembly and the Senate. At the presidential election incumbent President Emmerson Mnangagwa, representing the Zimbabwe African National Union–Patriotic Front (ZANU—PF), secured 52.6% of the total valid votes cast, while Nelson Chamisa of the Citizens Coalition for Change (CCC) took 44.0%. Meanwhile, at the elections to the National Assembly ZANU—PF secured 136 of the chamber’s 210 seats, while the remaining seats went to the CCC. ZANU—PF won 33 of the 60 seats in the Senate; the remainder were won by the CCC.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>26</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Gabon</b>
           A presidential election was held concurrently with elections to the National Assembly. According to the results of the presidential voting, announced on 30 August, incumbent President Bongo Ondimba of the Parti Démocratique Gabonais emerged as the winner, with 64.3% of the total valid votes cast, while Albert Ondo Ossa of Alternance 2023 (an opposition platform) received 30.8% of the vote. However, hours after the announcement, members of the military, having established a Comité pour la Transition et la Restauration des Institutions (CTRI—Committee for the Transition and the Restoration of Institutions), seized power in a coup, announcing the annulment of the general election and the dissolution of government institutions. The deposed President was placed under house arrest.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>28</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Mozambique</b>
           President Filipe Nyusi dismissed Arsénia Massingue as Minister of the Interior and appointed Pascoal Pedro João Ronda as her replacement.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>30</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Mauritius</b>
           President Prithvirajsing Roopun effected a reorganization of the 
          
          Council of Ministers, appointing, 
          <i>inter alia</i>
          , the Attorney-General and hitherto Minister of Minister of Agro-industry and Food Security, Maneesh Gobin, as Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>30</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Tanzania</b>
           President Hassan announced a major reorganization of the Cabinet, in which Dr Doto Mashaka Biteko, the erstwhile Minister of Minerals, was appointed Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Energy. Biteko was replaced in his former post by Anthony Peter Mavunde. The Ministry of Works and Transport was split into two, with the appointment of Innocent Lugha Bashungwa as Minister of Works and Makame Mnyaa Mbarawa as Minister of Transport. January Yusuf Makamba was named as Minister of Foreign Affairs and East African Co-operation, while Stergomena Lawrence Tax was appointed Minister of Defence and National Service.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>31</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>South Sudan</b>
           James Morgan Pitia was named as Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation, succeeding Deng Dau Deng who had held that position in an acting capacity since March 2023.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
          </chron-list>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.CHRON.3.151603102022" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>September 2023</heading>
          <chron-list>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>4</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Gabon</b>
           Commander-in-Chief of the Republican Guard and President of the CTRI Gen. Brice Clotaire Oligui Nguema was inaugurated as Transitional President. A new Transitional Government was announced on 9 September, led by Raymond Ndong Sima.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>4</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Zimbabwe</b>
           Mnangagwa was formally inaugurated for a second consecutive term as President. On 8 September Dr Gen. (retd) Constantino Chiwenga was also sworn in for another term as the First Vice-President, and Kembo Mohadi, who was ousted from his position as Second Vice-President earlier in 2021 on charges of sexual misconduct, was reappointed to that position. A new Government was installed on 11 September.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>8</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Togo</b>
           President Gnassingbé implemented a reorganization of the Council of Ministers.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>9</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Madagascar</b>
           President Andry Nirina Rajoelina resigned from his post in accordance with the requirements of the Constitution after he announced his intention to contest the presidential election scheduled to be held on 9 November. Subsequently the High Constitutional Court ruled that, President of the Senate Herimanana Razafimahefa having renounced his right, presidential powers were to be exercised collectively by the Government, headed by Prime Minister Christian Ntsay.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>12</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Rwanda</b>
           President Kagame appointed Dr Jimmy Gasore as Minister of Infrastructure, replacing Dr Ernest Nsabimana.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>16</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Côte d’Ivoire</b>
           Indirect elections to 64 of the 66 elective seats in the Senate were held, at which the ruling coalition Rassemblement des Houphouëtistes pour la Démocratie et la Paix won 56 seats, while the Parti Démocratique de la Côte d’Ivoire—Rassemblement Démocratique Africain secured six. Two independent candidates were elected. A further 33 senators were appointed by President Alassane Ouattara on 9 October.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>25</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha</b>
           Philip Kendall was sworn in as Administrator of Tristan da Cunha.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>25</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Zambia</b>
           President Hichilema effected a reorganization of the Cabinet, in which Chushi Kasanda was replaced as Minister of Information and Media by the hitherto Minister for Southern Province, Cornelius Mweetwa. Mweetwa’s portfolio was reassigned to Credo Nanjuwa, the erstwhile Minister of Central Province, and Nanjuwa was himself replaced by Princess Kasune.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>26</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>South Sudan</b>
           Angelina Teny, who had been dismissed as Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs in March 2023, was appointed Minister of the Interior.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
               <chron-entry>
                    <chron-head>27</chron-head>
                    <chron-text>
                         <b>Eswatini</b>
           Two days prior to the holding of a general election the Council of Ministers under the premiership of Cleopas Sipho Dlamini was dissolved, having completed its tenure. King Mswati III appointed Chief Mgwagwa Gamedze as Acting Prime Minister on the following day.
        </chron-text>
               </chron-entry>
          </chron-list>
     </gen-section>
</chronology>