<?xml version="1.0"?>
<essay id="ASS.ESSAY.17" id-root="ass.essay.17" iso="" region="ASS" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ESSAY-REF" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
     <heading>Brazil’s Declining Engagement with Africa</heading>
     <alt-heading type="SECTION-LONG-UPPERCASE" usage="ass">General Survey</alt-heading>
     <alt-heading type="COUNTRY-SHORT-TITLECASE" usage="ass">Brazil’s Declining Engagement with Africa</alt-heading>
     <author-group>
          <primary-authors>
               <person-name>
                    <forename>Gerhard</forename>
                    <surname>Seibert</surname>
               </person-name>
          </primary-authors>
     </author-group>
     <gen-section id="BR.IS.13443461731" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Introduction—The Development of Brazil’s Africa Policy since the Presidency of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (2003–10)</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P1">When President Dilma Rousseff was suspended from office in May 2016 as part of a process of impeachment, Vice-President Michel Temer assumed power in an acting capacity and appointed a new Government. Temer’s interim Cabinet announced its intention to strengthen relations with industrialized countries and to revise relations with Africa by prioritizing commercial benefits for Brazil rather than making major diplomatic investments with little economic output. Moreover, the new Minister of Foreign Affairs, José Serra, announced plans to examine the running costs of the Brazilian embassies that had been opened in Africa (and the Caribbean) since 2003. (At June 2016 Brazil employed 97 diplomats in Africa.) While in office, however, Serra did not close any embassy nor reveal if the stated change of direction in foreign policy would further diminish Brazil’s relations with Africa—a process that had already begun during Rousseff’s presidency. In May 2017 Aloysio Nunes Ferreira replaced Serra and in the same month he visited Namibia, Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique and South Africa, ostensibly in search of business and investment opportunities for Brazilian companies. Nunes Ferreira claimed to have resumed diplomatic initiatives that had been neglected during Rousseff’s presidency. His trip to Africa was officially announced as a concrete sign of the priority that Brazil attributed to its relations with that continent. Furthermore, in October, Nunes Ferreira visited Ghana, Nigeria, Côte d’Ivoire and Benin to strengthen bilateral trade relations, and paid another visit to South Africa, where he participated in the Trilateral Ministerial Commission of the India-Brazil-South Africa Dialogue Forum (IBSA), held in Durban. At the meeting Nunes Ferreira reiterated his intention to regain ground that had been lost during Rousseff’s presidency. In February 2018 he paid a brief visit to Luanda, Angola, where he pledged new loans of US&#160;$2,000m. to finance Brazilian investments in, and exports to, that country. Although the right-wing Government of Jair Bolsonaro, which assumed power in January 2019, announced that it would prioritize relations with the USA, Israel and other industrialized countries, in a speech made on Africa Day—25 May—the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ernesto Araújo, claimed that historically and culturally Brazil had strong affinities with Africa and declared that Brazil was interested in establishing a solid partnership with Africa, principally through trade, investments, co-operation in defence and security, and technical co-operation. In July Araújo took part in a ministerial meeting of the Comunidade dos Países de Língua Portuguesa (CPLP—Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries) in Cabo Verde; in December he revisited Cabo Verde, as well as paying visits to Angola, Senegal and Nigeria to promote bilateral trade and reactivate defence and security co-operation. Araújo declared that Brazil wanted to become a full member of the Friends of the Gulf of Guinea Group, created by the Group of Seven (G7) leading industrialized nations in 2013. In contrast, since assuming the presidency Bolsonaro has neither visited Africa nor has he received any African leader in Brazil, with the exception of South African President Cyril Ramaphosa during the BRICS (Brazil, the Russian Federation, India, the People’s Republic of China, South Africa) summit held in the capital, Brasília, in November 2019. Furthermore, in May 2020 the Government closed Brazil’s embassies in Sierra Leone and Liberia, on the grounds that they were of little import to the country’s diplomatic and foreign trade relations.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P2">Upon succeeding Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva at the beginning of 2011, Rousseff had announced her intention further to strengthen Brazil’s relations with Africa. However, in the event she adopted a more commercially minded approach to foreign policy, and rather than affording Africa substantial priority—as Lula had done—she focused more on domestic issues. In addition, during Rousseff’s presidency Brazil’s engagement with Africa was constrained by the country’s persistent economic decline. The rate of Brazil’s economic growth decelerated from 7.6% in 2010 to register a contraction of 3.8% in 2015. Compared with her predecessor, Rousseff undertook only a few official visits to Africa, further reflecting her Government’s different priorities. During the first two years of her presidency, Rousseff only visited South Africa, Angola and Mozambique (in late 2011). In 2013 she attended the third Africa-South America (ASA) Summit, held in Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, the fifth BRICS summit, in Durban, and the 50th anniversary celebrations of the African Union (AU), in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. During her visit to the AU headquarters Rousseff announced the cancellation and rescheduling of almost US&#160;$900m. worth of debt owed to Brazil by 12 African countries. The principal beneficiaries were the Republic of the Congo ($352.6m.), Tanzania ($237m.) and Zambia ($113.4m.), all of whose debts stemming from the 1970s and 1980s were rescheduled. The measure enabled Brazilian banks to finance Brazil’s exports to, and investments in, those countries. In December 2013 Rousseff returned to South Africa, on this occasion accompanied by four of her predecessors, Lula, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, Fernando Collor de Mello and José Sarney, to attend the funeral of former South African President Nelson Mandela. During Rousseff’s presidency, Brazil’s 37th African embassy was inaugurated, in Lilongwe, Malawi, in 2013.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P3">Lula’s frequent official visits to Africa were portrayed as a visible expression of Brazil’s intention during that period to strengthen bilateral relations with African countries as part of a global foreign policy. At the beginning of his presidency Lula declared the strengthening of South-South co-operation in general, and the renewal of relations with Africa in particular, as integral parts of Brazil’s political ambitions within a new international political context. An important domestic impetus behind his Government’s expansive Africa policy were the political demands of the Afro-Brazilian emancipation movement; to a considerable extent Lula owed his electoral victory in October 2002 to the support of Afro-Brazilians. Immediately after taking office in January 2003, Lula’s Government introduced African history and Afro-Brazilian history and culture into the curricula of Brazilian state and private schools. This resulted in a considerable expansion of courses on African history at Brazilian universities in order to train the requisite teachers. In 2008 the National Congress approved a law on affirmative actions in higher education that introduced a quota system to increase the number of Afro-Brazilians attending university.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P4">During his eight-year presidency Lula made 12 official trips to Africa, visiting 23 different countries, a number of which he visited more than once. Over this period he visited more African countries than all his predecessors combined and more than any other foreign head of state. To highlight the growing importance of Africa to the Brazilian Government, it should also be noted that Celso Amorim, Minister of Foreign Affairs in the Lula administration, undertook 67 visits to 31 African countries. During the Lula presidency Brazil increased the number of its diplomatic representations on the continent from 17 to 38, of which 36 were embassies and two were general consulates. Although the total number of Brazilian embassies in Africa has since decreased to 35, there are currently only seven countries in the world with more embassies in that continent than Brazil: the USA, Russia, France, Germany, Japan, Turkey and China. Another manifestation of the strengthening of ties between Brazil and Africa is the number of African embassies in Brasília, which increased from 16 to 33 between 2003 and 2010. (As of mid-2020 the total stood at 34.) During the same period, heads of state and government of 28 African countries made 48 official visits to Brazil. In recognition of his efforts in deepening relations between Latin America and Africa, Lula was invited as guest of honour at the 13th AU summit, held in Libya in July 2009. One year later, at the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) summit in Sal (Cabo Verde), he was officially honoured for his efforts in bringing Brazil closer to the African continent. After his departure from the presidency Lula continued his engagement with Africa and participated in several international conferences and meetings on the continent. In 2011 he established the Instituto Lula in São Paulo, the principal mission of which is the further strengthening of Brazil’s co-operation with Latin America and Africa.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P5">In the official political discourse, closer relations with Africa have frequently been related to the slave trade and slavery in Brazil, which resulted in a historical, cultural and emotional debt with Africa; however, a political commitment to Brazilians of African descent has also been alluded to in this context. While on a visit to the former slave trading centre in Gorée Island, Senegal, in 2005, Lula asked Africa for forgiveness for Brazil’s past involvement in slavery. The country’s population of African origin and the averred historical-cultural affinities with Africa are considered as striking differences between Brazil and other emerging powers such as China, India and Russia. Another recurrent argument in the political discourse is the relative geographic proximity, with Africa located at the other margin of the South Atlantic, akin to a river that can easily be crossed. The discourse should not obscure the fact that Brazil’s Africa policy is partly guided by a quest to secure raw materials and export markets for its own economy in order to boost domestic economic growth. However, Brazil is a resource-rich country, and is less dependent on raw materials from Africa than are China and India. Brazil’s petroleum imports from Africa are likely to decline when the country increases its refinery capacity of heavy oil stemming from the production of its own pre-salt reserves. While Brazil requires sustainable economic growth to create jobs to combat poverty and hunger at home, the main political goal of strengthening relations with African countries is to ensure the support of African governments for Brazil’s global political ambitions, with its particular aims of playing a more significant role in international politics and acquiring a permanent seat on the United Nations (UN) Security Council. The election of the Brazilians José Graziano da Silva and Roberto Azevêdo as Directors-General of the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) of the UN in 2011 and of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2013, respectively, was predominantly owing to Brazil’s diplomatic efforts in Africa. In June 2015 Graziano da Silva was re-elected Director-General of FAO for a second four-year term by the votes of 177 out of 182 countries. In February 2017 Azevêdo was unopposed in securing a second four-year term as WTO Director-General.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>A History of Afro-Brazilian Relations</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P6">As in the case of India and China, Brazil’s relations with Africa in the 2000s were not completely new, but rather they marked the country’s return to Africa, and represented the resumption of closer ties that were interrupted in the late 1980s owing to Africa’s various economic and political problems and Brazil’s own external debt crisis. However, Brazil’s efforts from the early 1960s to intensify political and economic relations with Africa took place in a different domestic and international political context than those pursued under the Lula Government. Brazil’s relations with Africa date from the commencement, in the early 16th century, of the slave trade, which, until its abolition, gave rise to the forced migration of about 3.6m. Africans to Brazil, a former Portuguese colony. According to the most recent population census, which was conducted in 2010, 51% of Brazil’s population of 191m. was at least partly of African descent. Furthermore, until Brazil’s independence from Portugal in 1822 and the end of the slave trade (in 1850), Brazilians served in the military and as civil servants in the Portuguese territories in Africa and were engaged in the slave and commodity trade with the continent. In the course of the 19th century thousands of former Brazilian slaves returned to Africa. These returnees settled in cities such as Accra (Ghana), Lomé (Togo), Uidah, Porto Novo and Agoué (Benin), and Lagos (Nigeria), where they created distinctive Afro-Brazilian communities with their own customs and cuisine. Since the 1960s Brazil has re-established ties with a few still traceable communities of former slaves who returned to West Africa.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P7">Following the end of the slave trade, the abolition of slavery (1888) and the beginning of European colonialism in the late 19th century, Brazil practically ceased relations with the African continent. In the first half of the 20th century Brazil maintained relations only with South Africa, and trade with that country accounted for 90% of Brazil’s insignificant external trade with the continent. In the second half of the 20th century Brazil’s relations with Africa were characterized by varying levels of stability according to the different economic and political conjunctures of the time. In one short period, under the so-called Independent Foreign Policy during the left-wing presidencies of Jãnio Quadros (1961) and João Goulart (1961–64), Brazil launched initiatives to establish closer relations with the newly independent African states. However, the military coup in 1964 brought this rapprochement with Africa to an end, as the new, right-wing military rulers in Brasília maintained close relations with Portugal’s dictatorial regimes of António de Oliveira Salazar and his successor, Marcello Caetano, both of which categorically rejected international demands for the decolonization of the country’s African territories; instead, these territories had, since 1951, been officially categorized by the Portuguese authorities as Portuguese overseas provinces. Indeed, Brazil was the only developing country that did not vote in favour of the UN resolutions condemning Portugal’s colonial policy. The first signs of a shift in Brazil’s African policy appeared in 1972 when foreign minister Mário Gibson Barboza made a trip to Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo, DRC) and eight West African countries in a bid to increase bilateral trade and co-operation. However, at the same time the Brazilian Government continued to support Portugal’s colonial policy. In November 1973 Brazil was one of seven countries that did not vote in favour of a UN resolution recognizing the unilateral declaration of independence of Guinea-Bissau in September of that year.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P8">The 1973 oil crisis, which threatened Brazil’s energy security and economic growth, prompted the military regime to change its African policy. In the late 1960s and early 1970s the average annual growth of Brazil’s economy was 10% over seven consecutive years, a boom that the military rulers did not wish to jeopardize. The threat to economic growth and the quest for raw materials and new export markets motivated the military regime of Gen. Ernesto Geisel (1974–79) to embark on a new foreign policy entitled `Responsible and Ecumenical Pragmatism’. The fall of the Portuguese dictatorship in April 1974 facilitated the change in approach. To demonstrate its new African policy, in July Brazil formally recognized the independence of Guinea-Bissau, prior to its recognition by Portugal’s new Government two months later. In November Brazil was the first country to afford diplomatic recognition to the then socialist Movimento Popular de Libertação de Angola (MPLA) regime. In the ensuing years Brazil further consolidated its ties with African countries, which led to a considerable increase in bilateral trade and the engagement in Africa of large Brazilian enterprises such as the petroleum company Petróleo Brasileiro (Petrobras) and the construction company Construtora Norberto Odebrecht (Odebrecht). During this period Brazil appeared in Africa as another developing country and a member of the G77, the group of developing countries established in 1964. In 1983 the last military ruler, Gen. João Baptista de Figueiredo (1979–85), was the first Brazilian President to make an official trip to Africa, visiting Nigeria, Senegal, Guinea-Bissau, Cabo Verde and Algeria.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P9">In the mid-1980s Brazil’s own economic crisis—provoked by unsustainable external debts left behind by the military regime—and the economic predicaments occurring in Africa at the same time resulted in a regression of Brazil’s political and economic relations with the continent. In the 1980s and 1990s Brazil’s average annual gross domestic product (GDP) growth declined to only 2.2% and 1.8%, respectively. In the period from 1985 to 1990 Africa’s share of Brazilian exports decreased from 7.9% to 3.2%, while its share of imports to Brazil slumped from 13.2% to 2.8%. Between 1992 and 1996 the total value of annual Brazilian exports to Africa stagnated at about US&#160;$1,500m., less than in 1985, and Africa’s share in Brazil’s foreign trade dropped back down to the levels seen in the 1950s and 1960s. Brazil was no longer able to grant import credits to African countries, many of which were themselves hit by economic crises in the 1980s. Only a few large companies, including Petrobras and Odebrecht, continued investing in Africa. Brazil’s economic problems resulted in the closure of its embassies in Ethiopia, Tanzania, Cameroon, the DRC, Togo and Zambia. Consequently, Brazil’s relations with Africa became largely restricted to the Países Africanos de Língua Oficial Portuguesa (PALOP—African Countries of Portuguese Official Language) and Nigeria, an important oil supplier. (The PALOP countries are Angola, Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, São Tomé and Príncipe, and—since 2011—Equatorial Guinea.) Of the 34 Brazilian diplomats based in Africa in 1983 only 24 remained in their posts in 1993, while over the same period the number of diplomats in Europe and South and North America increased. During the 1990s political stability and economic growth permitted Brazil gradually to change its image from that of a developing country to that of a potentially developed country.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P10">As mentioned above, at the beginning of his presidency Lula oversaw a resumption of his country’s relations with Africa as part of an ambitious global foreign policy, which aimed to boost external trade and obtain a prominent position for Brazil in the international political arena, matching its geographic, demographic and economic importance. Meanwhile, the context of Brazil’s foreign policy had changed, both domestically and internationally. Whereas in the 1970s Brazil was a right-wing military dictatorship and international politics were dominated by the bipolarity of the Cold War, by the time Lula acceded to the presidency Brazil was a consolidated democracy with a fast-growing economy in a multipolar world. Lula’s presidency coincided with the first decade of the 21st century, which was marked by three characteristics: a) by the emergence, in global terms, of a space conducive to the affirmation of the new polycentrism in response to the unilateralism of the strategy of US President George W. Bush (2001–09), the relative decline of the USA’s power and prestige, and the impact of the international financial and economic crisis; b) in economic terms, by the expansion of the global economy, followed by an acute financial crisis that particularly weakened the Western, developed countries, resulting in the substitution of the G7 by the more inclusive Group of 20 (G20) leading industrialized nations in the management of the world economy; and c) in Latin America, by a leadership vacuum caused by the diversion of the attention of the USA, the temporary absence of Mexico and Argentina from regional power competition, and the increasing heterogeneity of the region’s various political regimes as embodied by the populist rulers in Venezuela, Bolivia and Ecuador. During Rousseff’s presidency both the domestic and the external economic and political contexts changed adversely for Brazil, which resulted in a decline in the country’s engagement in Africa. Subsequently, under Temer and Bolsonaro Africa ceased to be a foreign policy priority.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="CG.13445124191" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Brazil’s Foreign Policy Initiatives Towards Africa</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P11">Brazil’s foreign policy has frequently stressed Africa’s importance as part of the country’s South-South co-operation. Although after 1985 and prior to the Lula presidency Brazilian governments did not consider the African policy a priority, Brazil’s diplomats did nevertheless develop various multilateral initiatives to reinforce South-South co-operation. During the Lula presidency existing multilateral organizations involving African countries were strengthened, and three new ones were established. However, since 2013 several of these organizations have become practically inactive. The Zona de Paz e Cooperação do Atlãntico Sul (ZOPACAS—South Atlantic Peace and Co-operation Zone), originally comprising Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and 21 African coastal states, was established in 1986 under President José Sarney (1985–90) through a UN resolution on Brazil’s initiative to promote regional co-operation, peace and security, and to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the South Atlantic. Between 1988 and 1998 five biennial ministerial meetings were held; however, thereafter the organization led only a shadowy existence. It was not until 2007, after a hiatus of almost 10 years, that ZOPACAS was reactivated at the sixth ministerial meeting, in Luanda, when it was agreed to increase economic, political, environmental and security co-operation in the South Atlantic region. At the seventh ministerial meeting of ZOPACAS, which was not held until January 2013, in the Uruguayan capital of Montevideo, the delegates adopted the Montevideo Plan of Action, including the mapping and exploration of the zone’s seabed, and co-operation in environmental matters, air and sea transport, and maritime security and defence. The member countries of ZOPACAS agreed to meet annually during the UN General Assembly to assess the organization’s achievements. Since the discovery of huge offshore pre-salt oil reserves in the Blue Amazon region, Brazil has increasingly asserted its presence in the South Atlantic region. In November 2015, in Salvador, Bahia, the Brazilian Government organized a three-day seminar on international peace missions for representatives from the ZOPACAS member states. In June 2016 Brazil and the International Maritime Organization held a seminar in Rio de Janeiro on maritime security in the South Atlantic, with a focus on ZOPACAS member states. In October, on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the foundation of ZOPACAS, a university conference was held in Brasília to discuss the organization’s past challenges and future potential. However, at the official ministerial level the organization has remained inactive since 2013. In that year, the G7 created the Friends of the Gulf of Guinea Group (G7++ FoGG) with the aim of supporting the maritime security of the member states of ECOWAS, the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the Gulf of Guinea Commission (GGC). At the time, Brazil joined the G7++ FoGG as an observer, but in late 2019 announced its intention to become a full member, indicating a shift by the Bolsonaro Government away from ZOPACAS’s role in the region.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P12">Another multilateral initiative co-founded by Brazil to develop South-South co-operation and help reform the international political order is the ASA Summit, comprising 12 Latin American and 54 African countries. On the initiative of Lula and former Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo the first ASA Summit was held in the Nigerian capital of Abuja in 2006. The second ASA Summit took place in Margarita Island (Venezuela) in 2009. A third ASA Summit scheduled for May 2012 in Malabo was postponed, but did eventually take place there in February 2013. The fourth ASA Summit, which was scheduled to be held in Quito, Ecuador, in May 2016, was subsequently postponed until May 2017; however, as of June 2020 the fourth Summit had still not taken place and the proposed ASA secretariat had not been established. Indeed, it now appears unlikely that the initiative will be continued. Between 2002 and 2011 trade between South America and Africa increased more than fivefold from US&#160;$7,200m. to $39,400m., with Brazil accounting for about one-half of the total. However, South America’s volume of trade with Africa was still considerably less than its trade with the European Union (EU), the USA, China and India.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P13">The creation of the Comunidade dos Países de Língua Portuguesa (CPLP—Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries) was proposed during a meeting of the heads of state of Brazil, Portugal and the then five PALOP countries in São Luís de Maranhão (Brazil) in 1989, and the organization was formally established in 1996 in Lisbon, Portugal. In recent years the CPLP has been given greater importance as an instrument to strengthen Brazil’s relations with the PALOP countries, which Brazilian diplomacy considers as closely related in terms of language and history. Angola and Mozambique have acted as important mediators on behalf of Brazil in southern Africa; the Brazilian presence in West Africa has remained fairly modest in comparison. Despite Equatorial Guinea’s record of human rights violations, Brazil steadfastly supported the application of this former Portuguese (then subsequently Spanish) colony for full membership of the CPLP. Equatorial Guinea was finally admitted as the organization’s ninth member state at the CPLP’s 10th Summit of Heads of State and Government, held in Dili, Timor-Leste, in July 2014. At the 11th CPLP summit, which took place in Brasília in November 2016, Brazil assumed the CPLP presidency for two years. In September 2017 Brazil hosted the 17th annual FELINO military exercises with participants from all nine member countries in Rio de Janeiro. Brazil held 13 different ministerial meetings in Brasília during the two-year CPLP presidency. In his address at the 24th Ordinary Meeting of the CPLP Council of Ministers, held in Mindelo, Cabo Verde, in July 2019, foreign minister Araújo emphasized the community’s importance for Brazil’s diplomatic agenda. Nevertheless, in March 2020 Brazil had not yet paid its annual contribution of €768,453 to the CPLP’s Executive Secretariat for 2019, let alone for 2020. Indeed, as of that date, only four of the nine member countries had paid their contributions for 2019.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P14">Under President Lula Brazil favoured a multilateral approach to its involvement in the international arena and its search for a greater role in the changing global political order. In 2003, at the fifth Ministerial Conference of the WTO in Cancún (Mexico), Brazil—together with China, India, South Africa, four other African countries and other countries of the South—created the G20 to promote the abolition of state subsidies for agriculture and trade protectionism within the framework of a new world trade agreement. In the same year the IBSA Dialogue Forum was established by India, Brazil and South Africa with the aim of deepening political, strategic and economic co-operation between the three emerging powers, which represent populous multi-ethnic democracies in three continents, and all three of which are seeking to attain a permanent seat on the UN Security Council. IBSA has established 16 government-level sectoral working groups and seven people-to-people forums which regularly exchange knowledge and experience in key areas relevant to developing countries. IBSA also operates a development fund (the Facility for Poverty and Hunger Alleviation) with a modest annual contribution of US&#160;$1m. per member, which has undertaken 32 projects in Guinea-Bissau, Cabo Verde, Comoros, Fiji, Bolivia, Kiribati, Grenada, Zambia, Sierra Leone, Sudan, the Palestinian Territories, Guyana, Saint Lucia, Timor-Leste, Cambodia, Haiti, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Viet Nam and Burundi. By the end of 2018 funds totalling US&#160;$37m. had been received. The UN Development Programme (UNDP) has acted as the IBSA Fund manager. The most recent IBSA Fund report was published by UNDP in 2018. The three member states undertook joint naval exercises (IBSAMAR) on four occasions between 2008 and 2014 off the southern and western coastlines of South Africa. The fifth IBSAMAR exercise was conducted in Indian waters in February 2016 and the sixth such exercise took place in South African waters in October 2018. Despite the ongoing global coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, in March 2020 it was announced that the seventh IBSAMAR exercise was scheduled to take place in September/October, again off the coast of South Africa. Between 2006 and 2011 IBSA held five summits, on an annual basis, attended by the three members’ heads of state. However, the sixth IBSA summit, which was to be convened in India in the first half of 2018, did not take place. At a lower level, the eighth IBSA Trilateral Ministerial Commission meeting was held in Durban in October 2017. In September 2018 the three IBSA countries’ foreign ministers met again at the 73rd UN General Assembly in New York, USA. They stressed the importance of South-South co-operation, advocated the reform of the UN Security Council, and supported India’s plans to host the sixth IBSA summit in 2019. However, these plans proved fruitless, and since 2018 no further IBSA ministerial meetings have been held. Although IBSA’s importance as an international organization appears to have diminished, at the same time its three member countries have, through their co-operation within BRICS, given that body more political weight.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P15">Brazil supported South Africa’s incorporation as a representative of the African continent in the BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India, China) group of emerging powers with large economies and high economic growth rates in the early 2000s. The five countries together currently represent some 42% of the global population, 23% of GDP, 30% of the land area and 18% of trade. During 2008–17 the bloc’s average annual economic growth rate was about 8%, while the world as a whole averaged growth of around 1% per year. The five countries have, however, also been characterized by significant socioeconomic inequalities resulting in low per capita income rates. In Brazil some 3.7% of the population were still classified as living in extreme poverty in 2012, despite the fact that as a result of the successful implementation of social policies around 30m. Brazilians succeeded in escaping poverty between 2003 and 2010. The number of Brazilians living in extreme poverty increased from 13.5m. (6.6% of the total population) in 2016 to 15.2m. people (7.4%) in 2017. During 2000–09 the total value of trade between the four BRIC countries and Africa increased almost 10-fold from US&#160;$16,000m. to $157,000m., while trade with the rest of the world `only’ tripled over the same period. At the first summit of BRIC heads of state, which was held in 2009 in Yekaterinburg (Russia), the four member countries demanded a greater say for emerging powers in the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the UN, as well as a more stable international monetary system. The second BRIC summit, held in Brasília in April 2010, advocated a transformation in global governance on all relevant levels. At the third summit, held in Hainan (China) in April 2011, South Africa formally joined the grouping which was thereupon restyled BRICS. Although China has become Brazil’s most important foreign investor and trading partner, it is also a major competitor with regard to manufactured goods and resources in Africa. At the fifth BRICS summit, held in Durban in March 2013, the heads of state agreed to establish a new development bank to meet the needs of the five member countries regarding infrastructure development. The sixth BRICS summit, which took place in Fortaleza (Brazil) in July 2014, debated social inclusion and sustainable development to highlight a new financial architecture, and adopted the Fortaleza Declaration and Action Plan, the agreement on the New Development Bank (NDB, with capital of $100,000m.), which was to be headquartered in Shanghai (China), and a monetary stabilization fund—also of $100,000m. and towards which Brazil agreed to provide $18,000m. The NDB and the fund—entitled the BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement—were officially launched at the seventh BRICS summit, which was held in the southern Russian city of Ufa in July 2015. In that year the BRICS countries accounted for a nominal GDP of $16,920,000m., equivalent to 23.1% of global GDP. The eighth BRICS summit, which was held under the theme `Building Responsive, Inclusive and Collective Solutions’, took place in Goa (India) in October 2016. The five countries promised to use all possible policy tools to achieve sustainable economic growth. Meanwhile, in April of that year the NDB approved its first loans, totalling $811m., to finance renewable energy projects in Brazil (which received $300m.), China ($81m.), India ($250m.) and South Africa ($180m.). Between November 2016 and March 2017 additional loans for renewable energy projects were granted to Russia ($100m.), India ($350m.) and China ($298m.). In August 2017 the NDB approved loans worth an aggregate total of more than $1,400m. for four projects: two in China, concerning the respective areas of flood control and energy conservation ($470m.), one for a rural drinking water development scheme in India ($470m.), and the fourth for the development of an IT system for the Russian judiciary ($460m.). At its third annual meeting in May 2018, the NDB board approved loans for six new environmental and infrastructure projects worth a total of $1,600m., including one each in Brazil ($200m.), India ($350m.), China ($300m.) and South Africa ($200m.), and two in Russia ($540m.). The ninth BRICS summit took place in Xiamen, China, in September 2017 under the theme `BRICS: Stronger Partnership for a Brighter Future’. At the 10th summit, held in July 2018 in the South African city of Johannesburg, the BRICS countries declared their commitment to multilateralism, the central role of the UN in international affairs, the struggle against climate change, and to an open world economy. In addition, a Partnership on New Industrial Revolution was established, as well as a Working Group on Tourism to promote tourism among and within the five member states. In 2018 Brazil’s trade with the four other BRICS countries amounted to $113,500m., of which China alone accounted for 87%. In August of that year the NDB received AA+ long-term and A–1+ short-term issuer credit ratings from Standard &amp; Poor’s and Fitch. In the following month the bank approved loans for infrastructure projects in India ($525m.) and Russia ($300m,), and in November loans were provided for projects in China (4,600m. yuan) and India ($260m.). At the fourth annual meeting of the NDB board, held in Cape Town, South Africa, in March/April 2019, loan agreements were signed for infrastructure investments in China ($300m.), South Africa ($780m.) and China (825m. yuan). The NDB also approved a loan (of $480m.) with a sovereign guarantee to South Africa’s Electricity Supply Commission (ESKOM) for a renewable energy integration and transmission augmentation project. Between June and November, the NDB board approved another nine loans: two for China (2,100m. yuan and 2,512m. yuan), three for India (two for $300m. and one for $646m.), two for Brazil ($500m. and $300m.), and one each for Russia ($300m.) and South Africa (R&#160;7,000m.). In November Brazil hosted the 11th annual BRICS summit under the banner of `Economic Growth for an Innovative Future’. In the final declaration, the heads of state of the five member countries reiterated that there was an urgent need to strengthen and reform the multilateral system, including the UN, the WTO and the IMF; condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations; and promised to combat illicit financial flows. In addition, they pledged their commitment to sustainable development in its three dimensions—economic, social and environmental—in a balanced and integrated manner, and expressed their appreciation of the NDB’s role in infrastructure and sustainable development financing. Between December 2019 and April 2020 the NDB approved a total of 12 loans: two for China (2,760m. yuan and 7,000m. yuan), six for India ($312m., $225m., $300m., $500m., $100m. and $1,000m.), three for Russia ($400m., $600m. and $400m.) and one for Brazil ($100m.), </p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="GH.DIR.14056934521" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Brazilian Trade and Investments in Africa</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P16">Until 2013 the strengthening of Brazilian-African relations during the early 21st century was also mirrored by an increase in bilateral trade and investments by Brazilian companies in Africa, where until recently some of the fastest growing economies in the world were located. However, the scope of Brazil’s trade and investments in Africa does not correspond to the country’s impressive prestige diplomacy, nor does it match that of larger emerging powers such as China and India. Between 2000 and 2013 Brazil’s total trade (imports and exports) with Africa grew more than sixfold in terms of value, from US&#160;$4,300m. (representing 3.8% of Brazil’s total external trade) to $28,500m. (5.7%). Nevertheless, viewed proportionally, Brazil’s trade with Africa did not reach the share registered in 1985. In addition, due to Brazil’s ongoing economic crisis, the volume of trade with Africa has dropped in recent years. In relative terms, the best year during the first decade of the 21st century was 2007, with Africa accounting for 7.1% of Brazil’s external trade. In comparison, between 2000 and 2010 China’s share of Brazil’s trade increased from 2.1% to 14.7%. In 2010 Brazil was the source of 2.1% of Africa’s total imports and occupied only 16th position in a ranking of Africa’s suppliers, behind the majority of the other BRICS countries including China (which held first position, with 13.8% of imports), India (sixth, with 4.1%) and South Africa (11th, with 2.8%). Brazil’s total trade with Africa decreased from around $28,500m. in 2013 to $26,800m. in 2014, $17,000m. in 2015 and further, to $12,400m., in 2016. During these four years Africa accounted for 5.7%, 5.9%, 4.7% and 3.9%, respectively, of Brazil’s total external trade. In 2017 and 2018, owing to an improvement in the performance of Brazil’s economy, its trade with Africa recovered somewhat to reach $14,924m. and $14,768m., equivalent to 4.0% and 3.5% of total external trade, respectively. In 2019, however, Brazil’s trade with Africa declined again, falling by 10.8% to $13,114m. (3.2% of total external trade). Brazil’s principal trading partners in Africa are Algeria, Nigeria, Angola, South Africa and Egypt. Together these five countries account for some two-thirds of Brazilian exports to Africa and 85% of imports to Brazil from the continent. Algeria, Angola and Nigeria export oil to Brazil almost exclusively, while South Africa is predominantly a supplier of coal and ores. Brazil’s main exports to Africa are sugar, meat, soya, maize, fuel oils and iron ore.</p>
          <table-block id="ASS.ESSAY.17.060820121136" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="TABLE-BLOCKREF" type="OTHER">
               <table-heading>Table 1. Brazil’s External Trade with Africa (US&#160;$ million, f.o.b.)</table-heading>
               <table pgwide="NO" style="WITH-RULES">
                    <tgroup cols="6">
                         <colspec colwidth="7cm" />
                         <colspec colwidth="2.5cm" />
                         <colspec colwidth="2.5cm" />
                         <colspec colwidth="2.5cm" />
                         <colspec colwidth="2.5cm" />
                         <colspec colname="COLSPEC0" colwidth="2.50cm" />
                         <thead>
                              <row>
                                   <entry align="left" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2000</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2005</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2010</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2015</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2019</entry>
                              </row>
                         </thead>
                         <tbody>
                              <row>
                                   <entry align="left" style="DOT-LEADER">Merchandise exports</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">1,347</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">5,981</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">9,262</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">8,202</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">7,536</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry align="left" style="DOT-LEADER">Merchandise imports</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2,907</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">6,657</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">11,301</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">8,764</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">5,578</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry align="left" style="DOT-LEADER">Visible trade balance</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">–1,560</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">–675</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">–2,041</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">–562</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">1,957</entry>
                              </row>
                         </tbody>
                    </tgroup>
               </table>
               <sources>
                    <source-head>Source</source-head>
                    <source-info>Ministério da Indústria, Comércio Exterior e Serviços</source-info>
               </sources>
          </table-block>
          <table-block id="ASS.ESSAY.113706082012" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="TABLE-BLOCKREF" type="OTHER">
               <table-heading>Table 2. Africa’s Share of Brazil’s External Trade (%)</table-heading>
               <table pgwide="NO" style="WITH-RULES">
                    <tgroup cols="6">
                         <colspec colwidth="7cm" />
                         <colspec colwidth="2.5cm" />
                         <colspec colwidth="2.5cm" />
                         <colspec colwidth="2.5cm" />
                         <colspec colwidth="2.5cm" />
                         <colspec colname="COLSPEC0" colwidth="2.50cm" />
                         <thead>
                              <row>
                                   <entry align="left" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2000</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2005</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2010</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2015</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2019</entry>
                              </row>
                         </thead>
                         <tbody>
                              <row>
                                   <entry align="left" style="DOT-LEADER">Merchandise exports</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2.4</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">5.1</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">4.6</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">3.2</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">3.3</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry align="left" style="DOT-LEADER">Merchandise imports</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">5.2</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">9.0</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">6.2</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">3.9</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">3.1</entry>
                              </row>
                         </tbody>
                    </tgroup>
               </table>
               <sources>
                    <source-head>Sources</source-head>
                    <source-info>Ministério da Indústria, Comércio Exterior e Serviços</source-info>
               </sources>
          </table-block>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P17">Brazilian direct investments in Africa are concentrated in the energy, mining, construction and biofuel sectors. After the USA, Brazil is the world’s second largest producer of ethanol. A study by the Brazilian Fundação Getúlio Vargas recommended Angola and Mozambique as favourable locations in Africa for the production of ethanol and other biofuels, and as a leader in biofuel technology Brazil has expressed a keen interest in producing it in African countries. Subsequent feasibility studies also identified Senegal, Tanzania and Zambia as promising localities for production of the chemical compound. By 2015 Brazil had signed agreements on biofuel co-operation with 14 African countries, 10 of which were concluded during the Lula presidency. However, as of mid-2018 biofuel projects had been initiated only in Angola, Mozambique and Sudan. Doubts about the sustainability of biofuels and low oil prices since 2014 have prompted African governments to abandon biofuel projects. By 2016 there were seven countries with a mandatory policy of blending ethanol into gasoline (Angola, Ethiopia, Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa, Sudan and Zimbabwe).</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P18">Africa is only the fifth most important region in terms of location of large Brazilian enterprises, after South America, Europe, Asia and North America. However, during the Lula presidency Africa was the region with the third highest increase in Brazilian foreign direct investment (FDI). In 2009 Brazilian investments in Africa exceeded US&#160;$10,000m., accounting for almost 6.4% of Brazil’s total FDI in that year of $157,000m. Although Brazil’s investments in Africa increased by 10.7% between 2007 and 2011, Brazil’s FDI in Africa accounted for only 0.6% of total FDI to the continent. During 2003–11 Brazil was the 11th largest investor in Africa, with a share of 2.8% in terms of value. However, in recent years several major Brazilian companies, including the oil company Petrobras, have ceased operating in African countries. To promote Brazilian investments in the continent, since 2013 the Brazilian Government has advocated the drawing up of an Agreement on Cooperation and Facilitation of Investments (ACFI) with, individually, South Africa, Angola, Mozambique, Malawi, Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia and Nigeria. In 2015 Brazil signed ACFIs with Mozambique, Angola and Malawi. In April 2018 another ACFI was signed with Ethiopia, and in June 2019 another with Morocco. The principal Brazilian companies that have invested in African countries are Petrobras, the mining company Vale (formerly Companhia Vale do Rio Doce), the construction companies Odebrecht, Camargo Corrêa, Grupo Queiroz Galvão, OAS, Andrade Gutierrez (AG, particularly through its Portuguese subsidiary Andrade Gutierrez Europa, África, Ásia/AG EAA—formerly Zagope) and Marcopolo, a bus manufacturer, which owns production plants in Johannesburg (since 2000) and in the Egyptian city of Suez (GB Polo Bus Manufacturing Company, a joint venture with the local manufacturer GB Auto SAE, since 2008). In 2017 Marcopolo reduced its participation in the joint venture in Egypt from 49% to 20%. In the following year the Marcopolo plant in South Africa produced 344 units, while net earnings totalled R&#160;$127.5m. (an increase of 42.9% compared with the previous year) and profit amounted to R&#160;$4.9m. In 2019 the plant’s output declined by 23.8% to 262 units, while net earnings fell by 30.5% to R&#160;$88.5m. resulting in overall loss of R&#160;$7.7m. Marcopolo exports buses to several African countries, including Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Gabon, Ghana, Mozambique, Nigeria, South Africa and Togo. In the first half of 2018, bus exports to Africa increased by 518% compared with the same period in 2017. Marcopolo’s sales in Africa represent some 5% of the company’s annual global production. </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P19">Petrobras operated in Angola’s oil sector from 1979, and has had interests in Benin, Gabon, Libya, Namibia, Nigeria and Tanzania. By 2016, however, Petrobras was engaged in oil production only in Angola, the company’s operational centre in Africa, and in Nigeria, while in Gabon and Tanzania the company was involved in oil exploration. In June 2013 Petrobras announced the establishment of a joint venture for oil and gas production in Africa with the Brazilian investment bank BTG Pactual, which purchased 40% of the subsidiary Petrobras Oil &amp; Gas for US&#160;$1,525m. In the same year Helios Investment Partners purchased 10% of Petrobras Oil &amp; Gas to participate alongside BTG in the joint venture. In April 2014 the Brazilian press revealed that the true value of the assets had been estimated at $4,500m. In the previous month the joint venture paid dividends of $300m. to its two shareholders. In May 2017 Petrobras and BTG announced their intention to sell their investments in Africa for $3,000m. Finally, in January 2020 Petrobas brought 40 years of operations in Africa to an end when it concluded the sale of its 50% share in Petrobras Oil &amp; Gas for $1,450m. to the Canadian company Africa Oil Corp. BTG Pactual E&amp;P B.V. (BTG Pactual and Helios) retained the other 50% of the company, which holds stakes in Nigerian oil fields. Since 2014 Petrobras has been under investigation by Brazil’s federal police as part of Operação Lavo Jato (`Operation Car Wash’), which was instigated to investigate a huge corruption scandal in which the construction companies Odebrecht, Camargo Corrêa, OAS, Construtora Queiroz Galvão and AG, as well as high-profile local politicians and political parties, were implicated. Several prominent politicians and company managers have been tried and sentenced to prison terms, while many others are still under investigation for corruption. In April 2018 former President Lula began a 12-year prison sentence for corruption after the Supreme Federal Court had rejected his final appeal in a controversial process. In April 2019, in another appeal process, the Supreme Federal Court confirmed Lula’s conviction, but reduced his prison sentence to eight years and 10 months. In November Lula was released from prison after the Supreme Federal Court ruled that a suspect could not be imprisoned until all appeals had been exhausted. In May 2020 a Regional Federal Court rejected Lula’s appeal and increased his prison term to 17 years. Operação Lavo Jato has investigated several agreements drawn up by the implicated companies in African countries. Although Vale, which is currently the world’s second largest mining company, has ceased activities in African countries, it still has investments in Malawi and Mozambique.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P20">In 2007 Vale and the Mozambican Government signed an agreement on coal mining in Moatize (Tete province). In 2003, three months before Vale won the public tender for the mine, Lula had cancelled Mozambique’s bilateral debt with Brazil of US&#160;$315m. The mining complex, a $1,300m. investment, was expected to extract 11m. metric tons of coal annually for steel and energy production. Vale has involved another 20 Brazilian companies in the construction of the mining complex, which has coal reserves totalling an estimated 1,000m. tons. In addition, Vale has participated with the Mozambican Government in a consortium established to construct and rehabilitate the 912-km railway line of the Moatize (Tete)–Nacala Corridor for the export of coal. Vale’s investment in the project is estimated at $4,400m. The railway line, which has an annual transport capacity of 10m. tons of coal and which includes 237&#160;km of track across Malawi, is intended to transport coal to the port of Nacala. In May 2017 the Nacala Logistics Corridor (NLC) was officially inaugurated. Another railway line, totalling 575&#160;km in length and with an annual transport capacity of 6m. tons, connects Moatize with the port of Beira. Coal extraction at the Moatize complex, which was expected to create 4,500 jobs, started in August 2011. However, owing to falling coal prices and high production costs, in the first quarter of 2014 Vale registered a loss of $44m. in Mozambique. Consequently, Vale requested that the Mozambican Government reduce taxes and transport tariffs to lower the company’s production costs. In the second quarter of 2014 the losses incurred by Vale Moçambique more than doubled to $103m. In late 2014 Vale announced that the Japanese company Mitsui was to participate in the Moatize–Nacala project, and in April 2017 Mitsui paid $255m. for the 15% interest in Moatize and $348m. for 50% of Vale’s stake in the NLC. In addition, the Japanese company conceded a long-term loan of $165m. for the corridor. Vale expected to receive an additional $2,700m. following the conclusion of the financing of the mine project and the transportation system. In November the NLC companies signed loan agreements totalling $2,730m. with the Japanese Bank for International Cooperation ($1,030m.), Nippon Export and Investment Insurance ($1,000m.), Export Credit Insurance Corporation of South Africa SOC Ltd ($400m.), and the African Development Bank ($300m.). In 2017 coal extraction at the Moatize complex more than doubled to reach 11.2m. tons. Vale expected coal production to rise further, to 15.0m. tons, in 2018; however, in November of that year this target was revised downwards to 12.0m. tons due to an interruption in production. In October local residents occupied the Moatize mine in protest against noise and air pollution and prevented production for two weeks. In response, Vale agreed to invest more than $8m. in social projects, which would benefit about 16,000 local families. In an attempt to improve Vale’s relations with the local community, in March 2019 the mine received its first working visit by a Monitoring Commission, composed of civil society groups and local residents, to demonstrate measures to reduce noise and other negative operation impacts. In 2019 the mine’s coal production decreased by 30.4% to 8m. tons. In November that year, Vale announced that operations at the mine would be suspended for three months in order to carry out maintenance work. Local organizations requested that the company use this period to conduct a local community and environment impact study. In April 2020 700 of Vale’s some 3,000 employees at the Moatize complex returned to their countries of origin owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, but operations at the mine continued.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P21">In April 2014 the Government of Guinea revoked the concessions held by a joint venture of Vale and the Israeli Beny Steinmetz Group Resources Ltd (BSGR) in the Simandou iron ore mine, after an investigation committee accused BSGR of having obtained the licence in 2008 through corrupt means. Due to the cancellation of the mining concession, Vale lost the US&#160;$500m. that it had paid BSGR as the first instalment of the agreed sum of $2,500m. for a 51% stake in the joint venture. In March 2015 Vale formally transferred its 51% interest in the joint venture back to BSGR. Subsequently, Vale sought international arbitration against BSGR in an attempt to recover the losses incurred. In April 2019 the London Court of International Arbitration ordered BSGR to pay Vale an award of $2,000m., including interest and costs. In November, the High Court of Justice of England and Wales rejected BSGR’s appeal against the decision. In March 2020 Vale secured a court order against BSGR not to dispose of assets worth $1,850m. In the following month Vale asked the US District Court for the Southern District of New York to compel three real estate companies to disclose transactions with BSGR in an attempt to discover whether the $500m. fraudulently obtained from Vale was used in estate assets dealings, and where the traceable proceeds of the $500m. payment were. Due to financial losses, in 2017 Vale’s joint venture with the South African company African Rainbow Minerals (in which the two companies each held 50%) sold its 80% interest in the Lubambe Copper Mine in Zambia for $97m. to the Australian private equity group EMR Capital.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P22">The engineering and construction company Odebrecht has focused its activities in Angola, but currently also has a presence in Ghana, and maintains offices in Libya, Mozambique and South Africa. The company has been severely affected by the consequences of the investigations of the anti-corruption Operação Lavo Jato. In 2016 Odebrecht employed 10,284 people (12.9% of its total workforce of 79,616) in African countries, significantly less than in 2015 (17,075 of a total workforce of 128,486). In 2017 Odebrecht reduced its total workforce to 57,589; the number of African employees was lowered to 2,823, representing a 72.6% reduction within only one year. In 2018 Odebrecht employed a total of 47,818 people, including 1,765 Africans (3.7%), of whom 1,563 were Angolans (3.3%). Previously the company also operated in Botswana, the DRC, Djibouti, Libya, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea and Liberia. In Angola, Odebrecht has been engaged in the construction of dams, roads, housing and industrial plants, the extension of the drinking water supply, and urbanization projects. Its engagement in that country has not, however, been limited to construction activities; it has also established a sugar cane plantation for the production of ethanol, and it holds a stake in a shopping mall in Luanda and is a major shareholder in an Angolan supermarket chain. Odebrecht is the largest private sector employer in Angola, but employment of local people dropped significantly from 9,601 in 2016 to only 1,792 in 2017. In Mozambique, the company has been in charge of the infrastructure work in the construction of the coal mine in Moatize, the coal terminal in the port of Beira, and Nacala international airport. The development of this airport, which was inaugurated in late 2014, was co-financed with a loan of US&#160;$125m. from Brazil’s Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social (BNDES). In 2017, however, the airport, which has an annual capacity of 500,000 passengers, received only 20,000. It operated a mere four domestic flights per week, while the expected international flights did not materialize at all. Consequently, the airport’s operational costs were twice its revenue. In Ghana Odebracht has participated in the construction of the eastern corridor road that connects Accra with the eastern provinces. In 2012, after 28 years of operating in Africa, Odebrecht set up the Odebrecht Africa Fund, to manage the company’s business interests in Angola and elsewhere in the continent. In June 2014 a public prosecutor in São Paulo accused Odebrecht of having employed 500 Brazilian workers in slave-like conditions during the construction of the site of the Companhia de Bioenergia de Angola (Biocom) in 2011–12, and demanded compensation payments of $226m. The biofuel company denied the accusations; however, in March 2017 Odebrecht and the Brazilian prosecutor agreed to drop the case in exchange for a compensation payment of $9.2m. Biocom was established in 2007 as a joint venture by Odebrecht (40%), Sonangol (20%) and Damer (40%), an Angolan company owned by two generals and a high-ranking politician. In October 2014 Damer’s shares in Biocom were acquired by the Singapore-based company Cochan, whose founder was one of the two generals who co-owned Damer. In April 2017 a US judge ordered Odebrecht to pay $2,600m. in fines in a corruption case related to the payment of $788m. in bribes to officials in 10 Latin American countries, Angola and Mozambique. In the same month Emílio Odebrecht, one of the company’s owners, revealed that the then Angolan President, José Eduardo dos Santos, had allegedly asked his company to help former generals to become businessmen in order to prevent them from jeopardizing the country’s political stability.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P23">Camargo Corrêa has also concentrated its operations in Angola, where it has been engaged in the construction of roads, power lines, schools and hospitals. In Mozambique the company carried out construction work in Vale’s Moatize coal mine and the port of Nacala. In addition, the company headed a consortium that in 2008 was entrusted with the construction of the Mphanda Nkuwa hydroelectric dam on the Zambezi river in Mozambique. The 1,500-MW plant was expected to be operational in 2017; however, this deadline was not met. In August 2018 Mozambican President Filipe Nyusi announced that Hidroelectrica de Cahora Bassa (HCB) and Electricidade de Moçambique (EDM) would be mandated to carry out the project, replacing the previous arrangement under which Camargo Correa had a 40% interest. Following the takeover of the Portuguese cement conglomerate Cimpor in 2012, Camargo Corrêa founded the subsidiary InterCement, which operated cement factories in Angola, Cabo Verde, Egypt, Mozambique, Portugal and South Africa. In October 2018, in order to reduce debts, the factories in Cabo Verde and Portugal were sold to OYAK Cement of Turkey. As of mid-2020 the construction company Queiroz Galvão, which from 2005 was involved in activities in Angola, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Kenya, Libya, Mozambique, Namibia, Senegal and Tanzania, operated solely in Angola and Ghana via its Spanish-based subsidiary QGMI. The construction company OAS, which started its expansion into Africa in 2009, claims currently to operate in Angola, Mozambique, Guinea, Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Namibia and Ghana. The company maintains an office in Conakry, Guinea. In 2018 the Brazilian construction company OAS won a public tender for an infrastructure project in Guinea. In 2013 the company employed 6,000 people in Africa, of whom 300 were Brazilians. Seriously affected by the Operação Lavo Jato investigations, in 2015 OAS requested court protection in Brazil from creditors and subsequently presented a proposal to restructure debts of almost US&#160;$2,500m. In March 2020 OAS completed the judicial recovery plan after having accomplished all of the requirements of the process. As part of the company’s restructuring, its debt was reduced from R&#160;$10,000m. to R&#160;$800m. Andrade Gutierrez (AG) is presently not engaged in construction works in Africa. The company’s construction projects in Africa are carried out by its subsidiary AG EAA, a Portuguese firm that it acquired in 1988 (when it was known as Zagope). Its Portuguese origin gives AG EAA access to European development funds for the financing of projects in Africa. In 2013 AG established a joint venture with Nigerian business tycoon Aliko Dangote, the AG-Dangote Construction Company. African projects account for around one-quarter of AG’s receipts. Since 2016 a $320m. loan from the BNDES for the construction of the Moamba Major hydroelectric dam on the Incomáti river in southern Mozambique has remained suspended due to the Operação Lava Jato investigations, thereby indefinitely halting the building work initiated by AG in 2014. In March 2017 the BNDES resumed disbursement of another loan—totalling $202m.—for road construction in Ghana, also suspended in 2016.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P24">The aircraft manufacturer Embraer has operated in African markets since 1978. In April 2017 Mozambique’s Attorney-General admitted that three Mozambicans had been investigated for having accepted bribes from Embraer relating to the acquisition by Linhas Aéreas de Moçambique of two of the company’s civil aircraft for US&#160;$32m. each. In February 2018 Mozambique’s public prosecutor demanded the restitution of $900m. from the three accused. A US investigation also revealed that between 2008 and 2010 Embraer paid $800,000 to two Mozambican nationals to secure the deal. The trial of the three Mozambican defendants commenced in the Mozambican capital of Maputo in February 2020. In October 2017 Embraer announced plans to establish a civil aviation training centre at Johannesburg International Airport in the first half of 2018. As of mid-2018 150 Embraer commercial aircraft were employed by 43 airlines in 22 African countries. In 2019 five African airlines operated Embraer commercial jets with a capacity of up to 150 seats. In March of that year Embraer sold two aircraft to Mauritania Airways and in November CIAF Leasing of Egypt and the Nigerian airline company Air Peace announced that they were each to purchase three aircraft from Embraer. In the following month Congo Airways of the DRC ordered two Embraer aircraft, with purchase rights for two more.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P25">In the 2000s the number of small and medium-sized Brazilian companies doing business in Africa also increased, particularly in Angola, the principal destination of Brazilian investments, followed by Mozambique, Libya and South Africa. In 2015 Angola hosted more than 70 Brazilian companies and some 8,000 Brazilian nationals, which, although considerably fewer than the 30,000 hosted in 2014, nevertheless still represented the largest number out of all African countries. In 2016 a total of 25,387 Brazilian nationals were hosted in Angola. Unlike Chinese companies, which often employ their own workers, Brazilian companies claim to use predominantly local workforces on their projects. Brazil’s exports to Angola decreased by 31.8% in 2018 to US&#160;$457.5m. and by a further 2.8% in 2019 to $444.8m., while imports from Angola fell by 20.6% in 2018 to $210.9m. and by a further 33.4% in 2019 to $140.5m. In December 2017 Angola’s bilateral debts with Brazil stood at $1,270m., of which $1,210m. was owed to the BNDES and $58.9m. to the Brazilian Government’s export financing tool, the Programa de Financiamento às Exportações (PROEX).</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P26">Brazil has identified the lack of direct sea and air links with Africa as considerable hindrances in the expansion of its economic interests in Africa. There are currently only two merchant shipping lines that directly connect the country with Africa, one of which operates a fortnightly service between Santos and Dakar (Senegal), while the other provides a fortnightly service between Santos and Cape Town and Durban (South Africa); these two services themselves provide feeder services to Angola and Mozambique, respectively. Thus, virtually all Brazilian exports to Africa have to be shipped through European ports where they are transshipped to vessels bound for Africa. Furthermore, African destinations account for only 0.4% of all international flights departing from Latin America. Until 2016 the six existing direct flights from Brazil to the continent were all operated by African airlines: South African Airways (São Paulo–Johannesburg), Angola’s TAAG (São Paulo/Rio de Janeiro–Luanda), TACV Cabo Verde Airlines (Fortaleza–Sal/Praia, Recife–Sal/Praia), Ethiopian Airlines (São Paulo–Addis Ababa) and Royal Air Maroc (São Paulo/Rio de Janeiro–Casablanca). However, in October 2016 the Chilean-Brazilian airline LATAM inaugurated a flight from São Paulo to Johannesburg, which was scheduled to be operated three times a week. In June 2018 TACV Cabo Verde Airlines inaugurated a third connection, from Salvador to Sal/Praia, which was to be provided three times a week. In December 2019 Cabo Verde Airlines (as TACV was now known) inaugurated a regular flight from Porto Alegre to Sal/Praia, but from March 2020 no longer provided flights to this destination from Salvador. In the same month, after 50 years of service, South African Airways ceased providing a service between São Paulo and Johannesburg owing to financial reasons. In 2017 Africa represented 3.2% of the 135,000 international flights operated to and from Brazil, 0.4% more than in 2016. Flights from Brazil to Africa increased from 3,200 in 2017 to 3,800 in 2018, of which about one-third were to South Africa. In 2018 the number of passengers travelling to and from Africa totalled about 500,000. In that year the number of passengers travelling from Brazil to South Africa was only 114,714. Owing to the lack of direct flights to Africa, travellers from Brazil frequently have to fly via European airports, which makes their journey to Africa more expensive and long (taking 25 hours or more).</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P27">In recent years Brazil has increased military co-operation with several African countries, notably with Nigeria, Namibia, Senegal, South Africa and the lusophone countries. It has established naval advisory missions in Walvis Bay, Namibia (1994), Cabo Verde (2013) and São Tomé and Príncipe (2015). Brazil has become the main supplier and training partner of Namibia’s navy and by 2013 the Brazilian Naval Academy had trained a total of 2,000 military officials from that country. Every year the Brazilian army holds a 10-month Portuguese language course in Namibia for Namibian military personnel who are to receive training in Brazil. In addition, Brazil has trained navy personnel from Senegal, Guinea-Bissau, Nigeria, Angola, South Africa and Mozambique. Besides the mutual training of officers and joint military exercises, Brazil has also co-operated in arms production with South Africa, and has been a supplier of military equipment to Nigeria and Angola. However, in 2016 Angola rescinded an agreement for the construction of seven Brazilian patrol boats for its navy at a cost of US&#160;$170m. on the grounds that the Brazilian shipyards lacked the logistical capacity to meet the agreed deadline for the delivery of the vessels. In 2013 Brazil pledged to train Cabo Verdean sailors in its naval academies and opened a naval mission in the Cabo Verdean capital of Praia. In the following year Brazil announced plans to rehabilitate the three naval bases in Mozambique (at Pemba, Beira and Maputo) and to supply military training aircraft. In 2016, however, Brazil revoked the promised donation of training aircraft to Mozambique owing to cutbacks in military expenditure. The Brazilian navy has also trained 145 marines from São Tomé and Príncipe’s coast guard and donated a patrol boat. Furthermore, Brazil has signed defence co-operation agreements with Senegal (2010), Equatorial Guinea (2010 and 2013) and Botswana (2018). Between 2009 and 2019 Brazil’s Federal Police trained 1,500 members of Guinea-Bissau’s police force. In 2019 Brazil provided training for military personnel from Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, São Tomé and Príncipe, Senegal and Togo as part of military-technical co-operation agreements concluded by the Agência Brasileira de Cooperação (ABC—Brazilian Co-operation Agency), a department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P28">Meanwhile, both public and private Brazilian weapons dealers have extended their sales to African countries. The Brazilian aircraft manufacturer Embraer has sold the Super Tucano A-29 military aircraft to Angola, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Mali, Mauritania, Nigeria and Senegal. In 2015 Brazil was the world’s third largest exporter of small arms and light weapons (with exports valued at a total of US&#160;$559m.), after the USA and Italy, and in 2017 Brazil exported armaments worth $476m. to 70 countries. However, Brazil was not among the largest exporters of arms to sub-Saharan Africa. In 2018, five years after signing it, Brazil ratified the multilateral Arms Trade Treaty.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="GH.DIR.14056957631" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Brazil’s Development Co-operation with Africa</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P29">Brazil’s technical co-operation is co-ordinated by the ABC. Technical co-operation has become an important instrument of the country’s foreign policy, since the projects contribute to Brazil’s political affirmation, prestige and visibility in the recipient countries, and are expected to increase those countries’ receptivity to doing business with Brazilian companies. The ABC was established in 1987 to manage the international development assistance received by Brazil; however, since the early 2000s the agency has been transformed into an institution that organizes and co-ordinates the country’s technical co-operation projects in Latin America and Africa, which are carried out by dozens of different public, private and non-governmental entities. The projects of this technical co-operation have been concentrated in areas where Brazil believes that it has comparative advantages, particularly in sectors such as agriculture, health, education, professional training, energy, social protection and public administration. Many of the projects are based on experiences with similar programmes that have been successfully implemented in Brazil. It is believed that the geographic proximity of Brazil and Africa resulted in geophysical similarities between the soil and climate of certain Brazilian regions and those in parts of Africa; these similarities can be of benefit to development co-operation, especially in the fields of tropical agriculture and medicine. Brazil defines its development assistance as South-South co-operation, perceived as a horizontal relationship between equal partners, guided by the political principles of non-interference in the internal affairs of recipient countries and without any political conditionality. Brazil asserts that its development co-operation is guided by solidarity and claims to be a partner rather than a donor. From this perspective, Brazil and Africa are viewed as natural partners, and their co-operation supposedly entails automatically mutual benefits for both parties. Technical co-operation is decentralized, based on demands from the partner countries and provided at comparatively low costs. In 2014 the average cost of an ABC project in Africa amounted to only US&#160;$31,500. Although Brazil’s development co-operation does not include the transfer of financial resources, it generally involves the supply of human resources, technology and equipment from Brazil.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P30">Until 2011 the ABC’s budget increased considerably each year; however, since then it has been reduced owing to the Government’s financial constraints. Consequently, the ABC’s staff was reduced from 171 in 2012 to 110 in 2016. In absolute terms, the budget amounts have always been rather modest. During 1997–2006 the ABC’s budget allocated a total of US&#160;$7.3m. to African countries, while in 2010 the agency’s existing projects in Africa accounted for US&#160;$22m., equivalent to 57% of the total annual budget. The ABC has undertaken technical co-operation projects in 42 African countries. However, due to the shared language and colonial history, and to the supposed cultural affinities, the ABC has concentrated about one-half of its technical co-operation in Africa in the PALOP countries, which are also the principal destination of the development assistance provided by the former colonial power, Portugal. During 2015–17 the ABC claimed to have disbursed a budget of US&#160;$59.5m., equivalent to an average annual total of US&#160;$19.8m., including military training and contributions to trilateral projects. During this period projects were carried out in 24 African countries, with the main recipients of funds being Guinea-Bissau (US&#160;$10.1m.), Mozambique (US&#160;$9.8m.) and São Tomé and Príncipe (US&#160;$6.0m.). However, the ABC’s budget does not reflect the total amount spent on Brazil’s technical co-operation, since dozens of other government institutions also finance such projects. In 2011–13 the ABC disbursed 71.6% of total expenditure of R&#160;$211.6m. for technical co-operation and spent R&#160;$40.3m. of this amount on the management of technical co-operation projects. During 2014–16 the ABC’s share of R&#160;$172.3m. represented only 4.3% of Brazil’s total international co-operation expenditure of R&#160;$3,900m. Aside from its bilateral technical co-operation with African countries, Brazil has also engaged in tripartite co-operation with member states of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Brazil has signed trilateral co-operation agreements with Japan, the USA, Canada, Germany, France, Italy, New Zealand, Norway, Switzerland and the United Kingdom, and its aim in undertaking trilateral co-operation is to share not only knowledge and experiences, but also costs, given its relatively limited means. Since 2008 Brazil has also begun to establish a few so-called `structuring projects’, with a larger scope and duration. The ABC has undertaken 12 structuring projects in Africa, including five in Mozambique and three in São Tomé and Príncipe. By 2014 the 12 projects represented total ABC expenditure of US&#160;$26.9m. As of May 2019 the ABC was executing 78 technical co-operation projects in African countries. In April of that year ABC co-ordinated the shipment of humanitarian aid to central Mozambique and the deployment of 40 rescue workers in areas affected by Cyclone Idai and related floods.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P31">The ABC’s most important partner in the agriculture sector is the Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuária (EMBRAPA—Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation), which was founded in 1973, and which has an annual budget of about US&#160;$1,000m. and a total staff of around 9,250 people, of whom 2,215 are researchers. In 2006 EMBRAPA, which has an internationally recognized expertise in tropical agriculture, established a regional office in the Ghanaian capital of Accra, since which time the corporation has commenced three large, long-term structuring projects in Africa. In 2008 it launched a project in Bamako (Mali) to conduct experiments on the genetic improvement of cotton in that country and in the neighbouring cotton-producing countries of Burkina Faso, Chad and Benin (the `Cotton 4’). Togo was also included in the project when the second phase was initiated in 2014. In 2013 EMBRAPA closed its office in Accra, but has continued to provide technical expertise in agricultural projects co-ordinated by ABC. In 2015 and 2016 EMBRAPA initiated two other cotton projects: the Shire-Zambezi Project with Malawi and Mozambique and the Cotton-Victoria Project with Tanzania, Kenya and Burundi, and during 2015–17 the ABC provided finance totalling $26.5m. to its three cotton projects. In 2020 the Shire-Zambezi Project in Mozambique comprised an area of 36.5 ha, incorporating 19 cotton producers in Manica and Tete provinces. They produced between 800&#160;kg and 1,300 kg cotton per ha, well above the national average of 550 kg/ha. In March 12 cotton specialists of the Cotton-Victoria Project travelled to Brazil to visit a cotton laboratory in Minas Gerais. During 2010–14 EMBRAPA took part in a trilateral technical support project with Mozambique and the US Agency for International Development (USAID) involving the development of agricultural innovation aimed at achieving self-sufficiency in food production. Another trilateral project involving EMBRAPA, USAID and Mozambique, regarding the improvement of food security in Mozambique, was undertaken in 2011–15. In 2010 EMBRAPA launched a two-year rice-growing development project in Senegal with a budget of $2.4m.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P32">In 2010 EMBRAPA created the Africa-Brazil Agricultural Innovation Marketplace with the aim of strengthening co-operation between Brazilian and African experts and institutions in the tropical agricultural sector. The initiative, which is supported by several international donors, involves dozens of short-term projects (some completed and some still running) in Benin, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, the DRC, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Nigeria, Mali, Malawi, Mozambique, Tanzania, Tunisia, Uganda and Togo. In October 2016 the UN named the programme as one of the 15 most successful initiatives of technical co-operation in emerging countries.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P33">In 2011, in conjunction with Japan, EMBRAPA launched a trilateral agricultural development programme, the Programa de Desenvolvimento da Agricultura nas Savanas Tropicais de Moçambique (Programme to Develop Agriculture in Mozambique’s Tropical Savannahs), known as ProSAVANA, in the Nacala Corridor in Mozambique, which was initially expected to be concluded in 2016. In mid-2013, however, local smallholders demanded the immediate suspension of the project (which covered an area of some 14m. ha with 4.5m. inhabitants) since they feared the loss of their lands as a consequence of private investments in large-scale cultivation of export crops such as soya, corn and cotton. The Mozambican Government rejected the concerns of the local farmers as unfounded. Notwithstanding, in June 2014 nine civil society organizations in Mozambique launched a campaign, `No to ProSAVANA’, aimed at halting the project, on the grounds that it would benefit only international agrobusiness, while adversely affecting thousands of local peasant families. The ProSAVANA project co-ordinator denied the accusations. In May 2015, during the public presentation of the project’s master plan, local farmers accused ProSAVANA of being incompatible with the reality of the rural communities. The national project director, however, rejected the critique, stressing that ProSAVANA aimed to enhance farmers’ lives. In January 2016 attempts were made to improve the dialogue between civil society and government with regard to the controversial project by trying to obtain greater influence for civil society in the execution of the project. However, local critics remained doubtful about the extent to which the project would integrate the development of smallholder families. In June 2018 `No to ProSAVANA’ again protested vehemently against the implementation of the programme. In February 2019 the Japanese ambassador in Maputo, Toshio Ikeda, announced that the project had been withdrawn and would be redesigned with the input and agreement of local communities. Meanwhile, in 2014 EMBRAPA initiated a trilateral project in conjunction with the Angolan Ministry of Agriculture and the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) aimed at developing public agricultural research institutions in Angola. In November 2015, in Brasília, 19 technicians from government agricultural institutions from Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique and São Tomé and Príncipe participated in the fourth round of a training course on the sustainable production of vegetables. In 2017 EMBRAPA initiated a three-year project, Poverty Reduction and Food Security in Africa, funded by US&#160;$695,000 from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, which aimed to benefit smallholders in Cameroon, Ethiopia, Ghana, Tanzania and Uganda through the establishment of at least 150 observation and technology transfer units. </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P34">The body in charge of ABC projects in the health sector is the prestigious Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (Fiocruz), the origins of which date back to 1900. Reformed in the 1970s, the foundation is associated with the Brazilian Ministry of Health and has more than 7,500 employees. Since 2008 Fiocruz’s regional office for Africa has been located in Maputo. One of Fiocruz’s major projects in Africa is the anti-retroviral (ARV) drugs manufacturing factory in Maputo, which involved investment of US&#160;$23m. (of which total Vale contributed $4.5m.). The completion of the project suffered consecutive delays and it was not until July 2012 that the factory started operations. Although the factory initially only packaged, stored and distributed ARVs that had been produced in Brazil, in August 2013 it began to manufacture its own ARVs. In 2015 the factory, with a staff of 45, reached the mark of 19m. pharmaceutical units of four essential drugs entirely produced in Mozambique. However, it was decided that from 2018 the production of ARVs would be replaced with that of analgesics (paracetamol) and nine other essential drugs, since the ARV that Fiocruz had transferred to Mozambique, nevirapine, had become obsolete in the treatment and prevention of HIV/AIDS. The Brazilian Ministry of Health was to finance the transformation of the factory with R&#160;$5m, and in October 2018 it was announced that the factory expected to double drugs production in 2019. Another Fiocruz project in Africa is the Haemophilia and Anaemia Treatment Centre in Accra, financed with a grant from the Brazilian Government of US&#160;$13.7m. (Although the foundation stone was laid in 2010, construction of the centre has not yet been completed, allegedly due to a lack of funds.) In November 2018 Fiocruz inaugurated a breast milk bank (BMB) at Maputo’s Central Hospital. In November 2019 Fiocruz opened its third BMB in Africa, at the Lucrécia Paim Maternity in Luanda, Angola. The first BMB established by Fiocruz in Africa has operated at the Hospital Agostinho Neto in Praia, Cabo Verde, since 2011. In addition, Fiocruz has provided institutional and human capacity building in the public health sectors of Angola, Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau and Mozambique. Moreover, Brazil has signed public health co-operation agreements with Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Congo, Ethiopia, Ghana, Libya, Namibia, Nigeria, Kenya and Zambia.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P35">The Serviço Nacional de Aprendizagem Industrial (SENAI—National Service for Industrial Training), which was created in 1942, is in charge of Brazil’s technical co-operation in the area of vocational training and is entirely financed by the compulsory contributions of the country’s private sector. SENAI has 22,595 employees and provides vocational training courses in 27 areas of specialization. The organization has established vocational training centres in Angola, Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau, and São Tomé and Príncipe. Between the commencement of courses in 2000 and 2008 the vocational training centre of Cazenga in Luanda trained almost 19,000 participants. In 2005 the Angolan authorities took over the management of this centre. The centre admits annually about 1,200 students, who are trained by 30 teachers, most of whom carried out their own academic training in Brazil. During 2008–19 a total of 4,237 trainees in 10 areas graduated from the vocational training centre in Bissau, the capital of Guinea-Bissau. In May 2014 SENAI inaugurated the vocational training centre in São Tomé; by mid-2018 the centre had trained more than 1,250 people. In July 2017 SENAI instructors initiated a three-year project of providing courses in vocational training centres in the Mozambican cities of Maputo, Nampula and Nacala. The project, which was financed with US&#160;$300,000 from the Mozambican Government and $3.5m. from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), aimed to train 2,000 professionals in areas such as electro-mechanics, civil construction and renewable energy. Besides the establishment of these centres, In November 2019 the second phase of SENAI’s co-operation with existing vocational training centres in Mozambique commenced. SENAI has provided capacity-building services to Odebrecht in Angola, Vale in Mozambique and Petrobras in Tanzania.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P36">Between 1998 and 2019 the BNDES approved loans totalling US&#160;$3,273m. for Angola (86 projects), $188m. for Mozambique (three projects), $154m. for Ghana (two projects), $52.6m for South Africa, and $16.4m. for Nigeria. The main beneficiaries of these loans were the major Brazilian construction companies operating in Africa. At March 2020 Angola and Mozambique still owed $708m. and $118m., respectively, to the BNDES. In addition, during 1998–2019 the BNDES operated credit lines for 12 African banks, totalling between $300m. and $400m., to finance Brazilian exports to the continent. In these operations, the African banks assumed the risk of the local importers. The principal purpose of BNDES loans was not South-South development co-operation, but rather the promotion of the integration of Brazilian companies in the international market. However, there have been recent cases of BNDES operations where the Brazilian state has assumed the political risk of loans approved for investments in certain countries. Due to the Operação Lavo Jato investigations, in 2016 BNDES loans to finance Brazilian projects in Africa were equivalent to only 1% of the average annual total provided over the preceding eight years: $6m. instead of $446m. In October 2016 the BNDES suspended the payment of $4,700m. for 25 loans conceded to Odebrecht, OAS, Queiroz Galvão, Camargo Côrrea and AG for projects abroad, since these companies were all under investigation for corruption as part of Operação Lavo Jato. The suspension of funds affected projects in nine Latin American and African countries, including four projects in Angola and one each in Ghana and Mozambique. By March 2017, after thorough investigation, the BNDES had resumed the payment of three loans, one of which was for a road construction project by AG in Ghana. In January 2019 Nigeria and Brazil launched Africa’s largest agricultural mechanization project, including tractor assembling plants in various regions, and professional training and technical assistance, which was jointly financed by the BNDES, Deutsche Bank, and the Islamic Development Bank with a loan package of $1,100m., which was to be disbursed in five tranches until July 2020. In the initial stage, the investment included the export of 100,000 Brazilian tractors and 50,000 pieces of agricultural machinery and equipment for assembling in Nigeria. The farming project, including the production of meat, food and cash crops, was expected to be implemented in all of Nigeria’s 774 local government areas, to employ 100,000 young Nigerians, and indirectly to benefit 5m. people.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P37">Another Brazilian financial co-operation body is the Cãmara de Comércio Exterior (CAMEX—Chamber of External Trade) of the Ministry of Industry, Foreign Trade and Services, which provided credits worth US&#160;$640m. for the export promotion and food security programme Mais Alimentos Internacional (MAI, More Food International), of which $240m. was disbursed in 2011 and $400m. in 2012. As part of this credit line, Ghana, Mozambique and Zimbabwe received credits valued at $95.5m., $97.6m. and $98.6m., respectively, towards the purchase of tractors and agricultural equipment in Brazil, where more than 100 companies participated in the programme. The term of the loans was 15 years, with an annual interest rate of 2%. Mais Alimentos Internacional, which was inaugurated in 2010 as Mais Alimentos África, but renamed in 2012 when Cuba joined the project, was co-ordinated by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food Supply and aimed to assist family-run agricultural interests to increase food production and create employment in rural areas in the five participating African countries (Ghana, Kenya, Mozambique, Senegal and Zimbabwe). In May 2017 Nigeria signed a protocol to enable its participation in the programme. Another instrument of CAMEX is the Programa de Financiamento às Exportações (PROEX—Export Financing Programme), which is managed by the Banco do Brasil and which has existed since 1991 to finance either the Brazilian exporter or the foreign importer. PROEX export financing for Africa decreased from $266m. (54% of the total) in 2005 to a mere $20.2m. (4%) in 2010. During 2010–16 Angola was the African country with by far the largest share of PROEX `equalization’ export credits (totalling $158.8m,), followed by Ghana ($38.8m.), South Africa ($17.9m.), Mozambique ($17.0m.), Ethiopia ($8.7m.) and Egypt ($4.9m.). In the same period Angola, with $62.8m., was also the major African destination of the modality PROEX `financing’ export credits, followed by Mozambique ($44.7m.), Zimbabwe ($33.4m.), Senegal ($28.5m.), South Africa ($22.1m.), Morocco ($8.6m.) and Egypt ($3.6m.). In addition, Brazil has renegotiated bilateral debts with African countries worth $1,000m., almost 75% of the total of outstanding debts having been renegotiated by the Lula Government. This represented an important measure in giving these countries access to new credits, to the benefit of Brazilian exports. As mentioned above, in 2013 Brazil rescheduled a further $900m. of bilateral debts with several African countries, with the same objective. </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P38">As part of its efforts to strengthen relations with Africa, Brazil has also extended its educational and cultural co-operation with the continent. Four Brazilian universities and two local universities participated in the creation of the Open University of Mozambique, financed with US&#160;$30m. over a nine-year period. The project, which was initiated in 2011, expected to train 7,290 students by 2014. However, by March 2014 only 590 students had been trained, while between 2011 and 2014 15% of the students at the institution abandoned their studies. Of the scheduled 10 university campuses in the provincial capitals, only three have actually been established, in Maputo, Beira and Lichinga. From the onset, these three campuses have been plagued by a lack of rooms, poor internet access, inadequate learning material, and the absence of properly equipped libraries. When Brazil suspended financing the Open University project in 2016 due to budget cuts, only 680 students had completed their courses. Another ambitious project in higher education related to Africa is the Universidade da Integração Internacional da Lusofonia Afro-Brasileira (Unilab) in the Brazilian town of Redenção, which was inaugurated on 25 May 2011 (Africa Day, which is celebrated annually in commemoration of the foundation of the Organization of African Unity in Addis Ababa in 1963). As well as the inauguration date, the choice of the location was also symbolic, since in 1883 Redenção, a small, remote town in the interior of the north-eastern federal state of Ceará, was the first Brazilian municipality where slavery was abolished. In May 2014 Unilab inaugurated an external campus in São Francisco do Conde, Bahia, one of the three federal states with the highest percentage of Afro-Brazilian population. Unilab aimed to admit 5,000 students, one-half from Brazil and the other 50% from the original five PALOP countries and Timor-Leste. In June 2020 a total of 5,026 students were enrolled at Unilab, of whom 4,619 were presential undergraduates. Of the latter group, 1,156 students (25%) came from the PALOP countries and Timor-Leste, considerably less than initially envisaged. To encourage foreign students to apply for admission to Unilab, such students receive scholarships during their undergraduate courses, which is not usual practice in other Brazilian universities where places for foreign students are provided only as part of the Programa de Estudiantes-Convênio de Graduación (PEC-G). Between 2000 and 2019 PEC-G provided 7,991 places for undergraduate courses at Brazilian universities for students from 22 African countries. However, during this period three countries alone accounted for two-thirds of the beneficiaries: Cabo Verde (39.7%), Guinea-Bissau (17.7%) and Angola (9.4%). Unlike the prospective students who apply for admission to Unilab, since 2015 applicants to PEC-G courses from the PALOP countries and Timor-Leste must have the official Certificate of Proficiency in Portuguese for Foreigners (Certificado de Proficiência em Língua Portuguesa para Estrangeiros—Celpe-Bras), despite the fact that they come from countries where instruction is in Portuguese, the official language. In 2000–19 Africans represented 75% of the 10,670 foreign PEC-G undergraduate students hosted by Brazil. During the same period 870 postgraduate students from 15 African countries received scholarships financed by the PEC-Pós-Graduação (PG) programme to obtain a Master’s degree or doctorate at a Brazilian university. The majority of African students who were granted such scholarships came from Mozambique (55.7%), while 18.7% came from Cabo Verde and 10.2% from Angola.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P39">
      Brazilian Cultural Centres, which are directly subordinated to the country’s local diplomatic representations, are in charge of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ cultural co-operation. Of Brazil’s 24 existing Cultural Centres abroad, six are located in Africa: in the capitals of the five founding member states of PALOP and in Pretoria (South Africa). The principal activities of these centres involve the instruction of the Portuguese language and the dissemination and diffusion of Brazilian literature, visual arts, scenic arts, cinematography and music, as well as the organization of conferences and workshops, and the distribution of information on Brazil. In May 2019 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs created the Instituto Guimarães Rosa to disseminate Brazilian culture and language in five foreign cities, including Luanda. Since the 1980s, and independent of government cultural policies, Brazilian 
      <i>telenovelas</i>
       (soap operas) have enjoyed increasing popularity in Africa. At the same time, the number of Brazilian Pentecostal churches on the African continent has increased, particularly the controversial Igreja Universal Reino de Deus (Universal Church of the Kingdom of God), which has been active in a further 20 African countries in addition to in the six PALOP countries.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P40">According to a report by the Instituto de Pesquisa Económica Aplicada (IPEA—Institute of Applied Economic Research), in the period 2011–13 Brazil’s development assistance amounted to R&#160;$2,800m. (US&#160;$1,500m.), of which 56% was allocated for international organizations. The country disbursed R&#160;$985.3m. (US&#160;$588.4m.) in 2011, R&#160;$1,004.4m. in 2012 (US&#160;$513.8m.) and R&#160;$857.3m. (US&#160;$396.8m.) in 2013, considerably less than in 2010 when expenditures for development co-operation reached a maximum amount. The annual expenditures for technical co-operation fell from R&#160;$76.4m. (US&#160;$45.6m.) in 2011 to R&#160;$68.8m. (US&#160;$31.8m.) in 2013. In regional terms, during the three-year period Africa accounted for R&#160;$62.8m. (46.4%) of total technical co-operation of R&#160;$135.3m. The fourth IPEA report indicated that during 2014–16 Brazil spent R&#160;$3,900m. on international co-operation, of which 80.5% was multilateral, 9.1% bilateral, 4.7% trilateral and 3.7% with groups of countries; 41% of the total was reported as contributions to regional and international organizations, and 39% was spent as capital in regional development funds. The annual expenditures varied between R&#160;$449.1m. in 2014, R&#160;$366.4m in 2015, and R&#160;$3,200m. in 2016. The significant increase in 2016 was mainly as a result of the payment of pending contributions to international organizations. International co-operation expenditures with Africa represented 25% of the total amount. With R&#160;$69.9m., Mozambique was the leading recipient of Brazil’s bilateral co-operation. In 2014–16 Brazil undertook technical co-operation projects in 22 African countries which accounted for R&#160;$53.3m of total technical co-operation expenditures of R&#160;$157.6m. Brazil’s three main partners in bilateral technical co-operation in Africa during this period were São Tomé and Príncipe (R&#160;$5.4m.), Mozambique (R&#160;$3.0m.), and Guinea-Bissau (R&#160;$2.9m.).</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.2021.P41">In 2010 Brazil’s international development assistance of US&#160;$597m. (excluding contributions to multilateral organizations) fell in the range between that of Portugal ($431.8m.) and that of the Republic of Korea ($900.6m.), but was significantly less than that of the UK ($8,000m.) and France ($9,150m.), countries with a comparable GDP. However, the problem with such figures and comparisons is that some non-members of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the OECD do not publish official data on their international development co-operation, and consensual criteria with regard to accounting of the different modalities of development assistance do not exist either. Brazil has declined to apply DAC norms to improve aid effectiveness, since the Brazilian authorities consider them to be incompatible with the principle of non-interference. At the same time, Brazil has remained a net aid recipient, since in recent years it has frequently received more than it has disbursed. According to the World Bank, the country received official development assistance of $1,145m. in 2013, $912m. in 2014 and $999m. in 2015. In 2016, however, the amount received decreased to $675m. and in 2017 declined further, to $265m. In 2018 the amount rose to $429.2m.</p>
          <table-block id="ASS.ESSAY.17.060820121146" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="TABLE-BLOCKREF" type="OTHER">
               <table-heading>Table 3. Expenditure on Development Co-operation in 2018, according to DAC criteria, US $ million</table-heading>
               <table pgwide="NO" style="WITH-RULES">
                    <tgroup cols="2">
                         <colspec colwidth="13cm" />
                         <colspec colwidth="7cm" />
                         <thead>
                              <row>
                                   <entry align="left" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                              </row>
                         </thead>
                         <tbody>
                              <row>
                                   <entry align="left" style="DOT-LEADER">United Kingdom</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">19,400</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry align="left" style="DOT-LEADER">European Union</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">16,400</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="DOT-LEADER">France</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">11,200</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="DOT-LEADER">Netherlands</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">5,600</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="DOT-LEADER">
                People’s Republic of China
                <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.17.1529503289" ref-symbol="*" />
                                   </entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">4,792</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="DOT-LEADER">
                India
                <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.17.1529503289" ref-symbol="*" />
                                   </entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2,957</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="DOT-LEADER">Russian Federation</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">1,000</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry align="left" style="DOT-LEADER">Portugal</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">390</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="DOT-LEADER">
                Brazil
                <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.17.1529503290" ref-symbol="†" />
                                   </entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">316</entry>
                              </row>
                         </tbody>
                    </tgroup>
               </table>
               <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.17.1529503289" ref-symbol="*">2017 figure</endnote>
               <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.17.1529503290" ref-symbol="†">2016 figure</endnote>
               <sources>
                    <source-head>Source</source-head>
                    <source-info>OECD 2019</source-info>
               </sources>
          </table-block>
     </gen-section>
     <bibl-section id="ASS.ESSAY.17.13442502871" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="BIBL-REF">
          <heading>Bibliography</heading>
          <bibl-list>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Abdenur, A. E. `Organisation and Politics in South-South Cooperation: Brazil’s Technical Cooperation in Africa’ in 
        <i> Global Society</i>
        29(3), pp. 321–338, 2015.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Banco Mundial e Instituto de Pesquisa Económica Aplicada. 
        <i>Ponte sobre o Atlãntico. Brasil e África Subsaariana. Parceira Sul-Sul para o Crescimento.</i>
         Brasília, 2011.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Barbosa, A. de F., Narciso, T., and Bianclalana, M. `Brazil in Africa: Another Emerging Power in the Continent?’ in 
        <i>Politikon </i>
         36(1), pp. 59–86, 2009.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Cabral, L. `Cooperação Brasil-África para o desenvolvimento: Caracterização, tendências e desafios’ in 
        <i>Textos Cindes</i>
         No. 26. CINDES, Rio de Janeiro, 2011.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        da Costa, K. P., and da Motta Veiga, P. `O Brasil frente à emergência da África; comércio e política comercial’ in 
        <i>Textos Cindes</i>
         No. 24. CINDES, Rio de Janeiro, 2011. 
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Dávila, J. 
        <i>Hotel Trópico. Brazil and the Challenge of African Decolonization, 1950–1980.</i>
         Durham and London, Duke University Press, 2010.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Iglesias, R., and da Costa, K. P. `O investimento direto brasileiro na África’ in 
        <i>Textos Cindes</i>
         No. 27. CINDES, Rio de Janeiro, 2011.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Instituto de Pesquisa Económica Aplicada. 
        <i>Cooperação Brasileira para o Desenvolvimento Internacional: 2005–2009.</i>
         Brasília, 2009.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
                    <i>Cooperação Brasileira para o Desenvolvimento Internacional 2010.</i>
         Brasília, 2013.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
                    <i>Cooperação Brasileira para o Desenvolvimento Internacional 2011–2013.</i>
         Brasília, 2016. 
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
                    <i>Cooperação Brasileira para o Desenvolvimento Internacional. Levantamento 2014–2016.</i>
         Brasilia, 2018.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">IPAD. Ajuda Pública ao Desenvolvimento Portuguesa 2007/2010, www.ipad.mne.gov.pt/CooperacaoDesenvolvimento/AjudaPublicaDesenvolvimento/Estatísticas/Paginas/default.aspx. </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">Itamaraty. Histórico do PEC-G, www.dce.mre.gov.br/PEC/G/historico/introducao.php. </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">Itamaraty. Histórico do PEC-PG, www.dce.mre.gov.br/PEC/PG/historico.php. </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Milani, C. R. S. 
        <i>ABC 30 Anos. História e Desafios Futuros.</i>
         Brasília, Agência Brasileira de Cooperação, 2017.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Ministry of External Relations. 
        <i>Letters from Africa.</i>
         Brasilia, 2010.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        OECD, 
        <i>Development Co-operation Report 2019. A Fairer, Greener, Safer Tomorrow.</i>
         Paris: OECD Publishing, 2019.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Penha, E. Alves. 
        <i>Relações Brasil-África e Geoppolítica do Atlãntico Sul.</i>
         Salvador, EDUFBA, 2011. 
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Ribeiro, C. O. 
        <i>Relações Político-Comerciais Brasil-África (1985–2006).</i>
         Unpublished PhD thesis, Universidade de São Paulo, 2007.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
        `Crise e castigo: as relações Brasil-África no governo Sarney’ in 
        <i>Revista Brasileira da Política Internacional</i>
         51(2), pp. 39–59, 2008.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
        `Adjustment Changes. A Política Africana do Brasil no Pós-Guerra Fria’ in 
        <i>Revista Sociologia Política (Curitiba)</i>
         18 (35), pp. 55–79, 2010.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Ricupero, R. `Carisma e prestígio: a diplomacia do período Lula de 2003 a 2010’ in 
        <i>Política Externa</i>
         19(1), pp. 27–42, 2010.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Seibert, G. 
        <i>Brazil in Africa: Ambitions and Achievements of an Emerging Regional Power in the Political and Economic Sector.</i>
         Paper presented at the Fourth European Conference on African Studies, Uppsala, 15–18 June 2011.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Seibert, G. and Visentini, P. F. (Eds). 
        <i>Brazil–Africa Relations. Historical Dimensions and Contemporary Engagements from the 1960s to the Present.</i>
         Woodbridge: James Currey, 2019.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Selcher, W. A. 
        <i>The Afro-Asian Dimension of Brazilian Foreign Policy 1956–1972.</i>
         Gainesville, FA, University of Florida, 1974. 
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Stolte, C. 
        <i>Brazil in Africa: Just Another BRICS Country Seeking Resources?</i>
         Chatham House Briefing Paper, London, November 2012.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
                    <i>Brazil’s Africa Strategy. Role Conception and the Drive for International Status.</i>
         New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2015.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Visentini, P. F. 
        <i>Prestige Diplomacy, Southern Solidarity or `Soft Imperialism’? Lula’s Brazil-Africa Relations (2003 Onwards).</i>
         Paper presented at the Africa Studies Centre, Leiden, 10 April 2009.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">White, L. `Understanding Brazil’s new drive for Africa’ in South African Journal of International Affairs 17(2), pp. 221–242, 2010.</bibl-entry>
          </bibl-list>
     </bibl-section>
</essay>