<?xml version="1.0"?>
<essay id="ASS.ESSAY.7" id-root="ass.essay.7" iso="" region="ASS" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ESSAY-REF" usage="ass" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
     <heading>A Century of Development: Policy and Process in Sub-Saharan Africa </heading>
     <alt-heading type="SECTION-LONG-UPPERCASE" usage="ass">General Survey</alt-heading>
     <alt-heading type="COUNTRY-SHORT-TITLECASE" usage="ass">A Century of Development </alt-heading>
     <author-group>
          <primary-authors>
               <person-name>
                    <forename>Michael</forename>
                    <surname>Jennings</surname>
                    <regnal>
          Senior Lecturer in International Development, 
          
          SOAS University of London, United Kingdom
        </regnal>
               </person-name>
          </primary-authors>
     </author-group>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Introduction</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P1">The last 100 or so years have been the century of `development’ in Africa. National governments, external powers, development consultants, policymakers and analysts have drawn up plans and implemented programmes designed to reduce poverty and improve the socioeconomic lives of the continent’s inhabitants. Aid policies and structures have emerged and evolved to pay for development activity. Societies have been transformed through the imposition of colonial rule, the birth of nation-states, incorporation into the global capitalist system, and by donor-imposed economic and governmental structures. Vast sums of money have been spent on developing Africa, entire professions have emerged concerned solely with poverty alleviation, and the line of politicians who have declared poverty in Africa to be the world’s most pressing issue stretches back through the decades.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P2">Yet, for all the effort, energy and words expended on development in Africa, what has been achieved? Life expectancy for someone living in sub-Saharan Africa was 58 years in 1960. In 2013 it was still 58 years, having risen from its fall to 46 years in 2004. In 2014 some 227m. people were suffering from hunger in sub-Saharan Africa, 24m. more than in 2002, and 57m. more than in the early 1990s. Over one-half of all maternal deaths in the world occur in sub-Saharan Africa. One could be forgiven for assuming that development has achieved little in the continent. Certainly the levels of suffering are almost beyond imagination, reduced to statistics showing in stark numbers the realities of life for millions of people.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P3">Since 2005 the issue of development in Africa has achieved unprecedented prominence on the world stage. The international community has held numerous meetings to discuss poverty alleviation, aid policy and poor-country debt. Major reports have sought to highlight the immediacy of the crisis and define new approaches to development, while from 2006, the emergence of a potential new major player in African development—the People’s Republic of China—raised questions about current policy paradigms.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P4">`Development’ has largely been presented as a monolithic, universally understood concept that has stood unchanging across the decades. In reality, the meaning of development, in terms of planned development, and the question of how it should be achieved, has shifted during the course of the century of development. In particular, two main questions have exercised those who plan or set policy for, or analyse, development in Africa. First, which agency should be responsible for planning and implementing development? Second, what are the objectives of development? Or in other words, what does `development’ actually mean? The answers to these questions have changed over the past century, and continue to play central roles in the debates about aid and support for current and future African development.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>A History of Development in Africa</heading>
          <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
               <heading>The Beginnings: Colonial Development to 1939</heading>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P5">`Development’ in Africa, in the sense of planned interventions in society and economy, began for much of the region with the onset of colonialism. Colonial powers were determined that the newly acquired territories not be a drain on metropolitan treasuries, and that they become sources of income. Early colonial planners regarded Africa as lacking in the vital accoutrements of `civilization’: capitalist social and economic structures (in particular a cash economy); modern communications and transport; and a centralized administration. The colonial task, as it liked to present itself at least, was to mould these new societies and `develop’ them, in order to create modern societies operating within a global market. `Development’ was defined by European perceptions of social organization, European economic need, and the requirements of colonial administrations to maintain power and control.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P6">Reflecting the Victorian division of society into rigidly delineated public, private and philanthropic spheres, early colonial development planning relied on the private sector as the engine of change and development. Capitalist investment would create the required modern institutions and structures, with the state providing the rule of law and order. Welfare activities could be left to the charitable sector (in this case the missions) which would provide the bulk of health and education services to the African population. However, the failure of the anticipated private investment to arrive in the new colonies forced the state to accept responsibility for creating the infrastructure—in particular the ports and railways—essential for the colonial development vision.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P7">For most African countries, agriculture was identified as the critical sector which would drive economic growth and expansion. Development planning, by the early 20th century, had thus become a question of how to increase agricultural output. Administrations faced two broad constraints (one real, one contrived by colonial depictions of Africans) in meeting this objective: a poor infrastructure inhibiting the movement of crops from the field to their end destination in Europe; and a belief that traditional land-use practices could not sustain a massive increase in production for the new export market. The first could be met through government investment. Over 90% of British government loans to the colonies, for example, were for the construction of the railways. By the 1930s a network of roads and rail tracks integrated cash cropping rural hinterlands to the global market. Those areas deemed unproductive were largely ignored and forced to rely on migrant labour as the main opportunity for cash generation.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P8">The second constraint was to be met by encouraging African farmers to change their practices, adopt `modern’ (i.e. European) techniques and new crops. Colonial depictions of African peasantry as inherently conservative and unwilling to change were used to justify compulsion and, in some cases, force. In Uganda in the early 20th century, for example, farmers were forced (often with physical violence) to grow cotton in certain districts. Development was therefore regarded as a fundamentally conflictual process: means were sought to persuade people that the priorities of the colonial state ought to be respected, with such persuasion turning to force where argument alone failed.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P9">Thus over the course of the first two decades of the 20th century, several important characteristics of `development’ had emerged. First, it was defined almost exclusively in economic terms. Second, the characterization of African societies as resistant to modernizing demands created a mindset that development implied conflict between planners and target communities. Development was to be a process of encouraging or forcing people to change, regardless of whether they accepted the logic of externally imposed values. Third, development was a process largely set and controlled by the state. However reluctantly, governments had assumed greater responsibility for development planning and financing. Nevertheless, that financing was to be the responsibility of individual territories, not a burden on the taxpayers of the European powers. Until colonial territories had sufficient incomes to pay for their development, European loans, not grants, would provide the necessary funds. Between 1896 and 1923 some 98% of British government funds for colonial development (across all of the British Empire) were in the form of loans. Colonial assistance (or `aid’ as we would now call it) was to be extremely limited. </p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P10">By the mid-1920s politicians in Europe, especially in France and the UK, were appealing for an interventionist policy, and improved funding mechanisms for the required modernizations. The foundations of modern official development aid were laid at the end of the 1920s with the British Colonial Development Act (CDA) of 1929. For the first time, taxpayers of one country were to support sustained development of those in another, and largely through aid in the form of grants rather than loans. Over 60% of CDA funds were provided in the form of grants, and of the loan element, around 80% was on easy repayment terms (generally with an interest-free period of three or four years and low rates thereafter).</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P11">This was of great significance for future development funding. The principle that development should only be funded through internal revenues was broken, and metropolitan regimes accepted that they had a responsibility to provide aid. Moreover, the types of intervention that the CDA envisaged supporting signalled a new departure in the defining of development. The `development as economic growth’ paradigm was gradually replaced with a model that sought to include welfare concerns. Aid was increasingly understood as a social investment as much as economic. Public health schemes in particular became a significant focus of aid allocations (16% of CDA schemes by 1939, the second highest proportion after communication and transport schemes). Advisory committees reviewing project proposals came to the conclusion that living standards were as important a responsibility of colonial development as increasing productivity and, indeed, could contribute to the latter.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P12">By the end of the 1930s the foundations of the modern development era had been laid. First, the state had gradually accepted responsibility for planning, directing and funding development, abandoning its earlier position that private investment was to be the main driving engine. Second, the definition of what constituted development had widened from almost exclusively economic dimensions to incorporate a social welfare agenda that regarded improving living standards as essential to the developmental mandate.</p>
          </gen-section>
          <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
               <heading>The Primacy of the State, 1945–70s</heading>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P13">Global depression in the 1930s and the onset of war in 1939 impeded the efforts to implement fully the new principles underlying development planning and aid that had emerged by the end of the 1930s. Such efforts were postponed until 1945, from which point colonial and metropolitan governments began to put into effect a more interventionist development policy. Post-war development was characterized by three elements: the absolute primacy of the state in directing, implementing and managing all aspects of development policy; a fuller incorporation of social development/welfarist principles; and the rise of international organizations to prominence in policy setting and funding of development.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P14">The experiences of central planning during the war suggested to the European colonial powers that micro-management of colonial economies was the most efficient means of ensuring development objectives were met. Colonial administrations devised long-term development plans, used marketing boards to set producer prices and purchase entire crops, increased the number of agricultural advisers, and sought to change laws governing land use, labour migration and urban settlement, pursuing measures designed primarily rapidly to `modernize’ colonial societies. The state was able to exert its full authority over development. Following independence from the late 1950s to the mid-1960s for the majority of sub-Saharan African states, this trend was continued.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P15">But the role of the state in development was founded on more than inherited structures and mechanisms for enforcing control. It also rested on a consensus that development was best left to the state. The creation of a large public sphere was not only tolerated, but encouraged by donors. International overseas development assistance (ODA) was directed through government departments and treasuries across Africa. Government ministers were expected to formulate development plans. The Bretton Woods institutions undertook projects with governments for the large part, rather than private investors or voluntary agencies.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P16">As the state assumed full control over development processes, the breadth of aims to which its activity was directed continued to expand. The definition of `development’ had fully accepted social welfare principles by this period, culminating in the late 1960s with the emergence of `social development’ as an objective in itself. Social welfare schemes came to dominate colonial aid spending in Africa, a trend continued following independence. The new national governments assumed responsibility for the provision of welfare services. The rise to dominance of social development at the national level reflected broader shifts in the international community: the United Nations (UN) International Development Strategy in 1970 which put social objectives at the heart of the developmental mandate; and the announcement by the President of the World Bank, Robert McNamara, of the `dethronement of gross national product’ as a marker for progress.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P17">Colonial development policy had been geared towards benefiting the metropolitan economy as much as (if not more than) the colonial territories. The independent governments had no such dualistic imperatives to consider in their development policy. However, the departure of colonial administrations left a vacuum into which the emergent international development organizations could enter. While African governments to a large extent could set national policies reflecting their own interpretations of needs and priorities, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, other UN agencies, as well as powerful new donor countries such as the USA and the Soviet Union were increasingly important partners in the process. African countries had since the onset of colonialism been subject to the policies of those who controlled access to funds. With the massive expansion in aid for development, particularly from the 1960s, they became subject to a broader range of interests. While economies grew, significant power over development remained at the national level in Africa. However, the apparent strength of the state in Africa masked a growing vulnerability. Should economic crisis emerge, the authority of those states could be challenged by the new masters of development.</p>
          </gen-section>
          <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
               <heading>Rolling Back the State, 1980s–90s</heading>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P18">From the mid-1970s a global slump in trade, collapsing commodity prices, and the economic shock of successive oil crises undid the advances made by African governments and led to a fundamental reappraisal of international development policy. The weakening economic position of African governments left them less able to meet the rising costs of social welfare and development spending. The sudden rise in interest rates led to the African debt crisis with governments now unable to meet the repayments for loans they were encouraged to take out in the more affluent 1960s and early 1970s. Unable to mitigate the effects of economic crisis themselves, African governments could not sustain internal control over development processes, and from the mid-1980s to the early 1990s they saw a gradual transfer of their power to external donors and international organizations.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P19">The state, identified as the driver of development for over 60 years, was now regarded as its chief brake: states were too big, too unwieldy and too inflexible to the demands of the global market. International donors began to call for the public sector to downsize and to undo its network of controls over economy and society. The market was resurgent, and private investment held up as the solution to poverty and new engine of development. The structural adjustment programmes imposed upon African governments called for the state to act as a manager of development and welfare, not the deliverer. The principles of the free market were to be adopted as African regimes were encouraged to sell off parastatals, cut the number of civil servants and public officials, eliminate subsidies and price supports and open up their economies.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P20">The `Washington consensus’—a phrase coined by the economist John Williamson in relation to Latin America—came to characterize the new orthodoxy underlying development policy worldwide. Among its key tenets, governments were to impose fiscal discipline, remove controls over interest and exchange rates, liberalize trade, and privatize uncompetitive public assets. While it was never truly a `consensus’ (not all of its policy recommendations were accepted, indeed some were vigorously opposed by the emerging anti-globalization campaigners), its promulgation through organizations such as the World Bank and the IMF and major donors gave it power and authority. Individual countries were forced through economic and political crisis to accept these terms in order to receive continued ODA. The combination of a government crippled by an economic crisis, and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) member countries prepared to use their aid policies to support the promotion of a new orthodoxy, left many African states few options other than to cede to the demands of international donors. Aid had become a tool for control as much as for development.</p>
          </gen-section>
          <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
               <heading>The State Resurgent? The Good Governance Agenda</heading>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P21">The hoped for massive inflow of private capital following liberalization and structural adjustment did not occur, and development indicators for much of sub-Saharan Africa during the 1990s seemed to go into reverse. As the HIV/AIDS pandemic swept across Africa, with debt levels increasingly unsustainable, along with a series of crop failures, droughts and famines associated with the El Niño effect, it was becoming increasingly clear that the power of the market alone was not sufficient to break through the development bottleneck. Just as the early colonial development planners had been forced to recognize the limits of private investment, the World Bank acknowledged that it had been overzealous in pursuing the rolling back of the state and had unwittingly undermined the ability of states to pursue development.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P22">
        Governance became the new watchword of development, with the adoption in the early 1990s of the `good governance’ agenda by the World Bank and national and international donors. The 1992 
        <i>World Development Report </i>
         coined the phrase `good governance’ and placed it at the heart of international development policy, highlighting four key areas: public sector management; accountability; a sound legal framework for development; and transparency.
      </p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P23">During the 1990s the technocratic model of the World Bank was refined by major donors and institutions such as the UN, focusing in particular on the democratic deficit in many African countries, the link between human rights and development and the link between effective and efficient states and the provision of equitable and universal social services. Good governance came to be defined as a democratic system, an independent judiciary, transparent structures, with a strong civil society able to participate fully in public life. Development could be achieved, the new orthodoxy suggested, through the use of aid and international development policies to reinforce good governance across the region. As the 1990s drew to a close international funds that a decade earlier had been channelled through non-official agencies, bypassing government ministries, agencies and treasuries, were now to be directed once more through state institutions. Governments across Africa were required by international donors to draw up Sector-Wide Approaches (SWAPs) and Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs) to illustrate a commitment to spending their national income to improve both the developmental prospects of the country and the lives of the most vulnerable.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P24">By the 2000s governance had become the new established orthodoxy of development, and remains so today: development was held to follow the establishment of good governance, and without it, could not flourish. As a result donors invested increasing proportions of aid into governance and civil society programmes. However, evidence for this new orthodoxy is contested, with critics of the `development follows governance’ model pointing to the example of countries such as the Republic of Korea (South Korea), Taiwan and others, where democracy, reductions in corruption and increased transparency followed economic development. Indeed, even the evidence that corruption undermines economic development has been challenged and shown to be far from conclusive. </p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P25">A more challenging critique of the good governance agenda, however, has been that while it has indeed seen a resurgence of the state, it has not replaced the former pro-market understanding of drivers of development, but actually served to harden reliance on market-based solutions: for the ideal type of governance that donors envisioned in their prescriptions for African reforms in this period were designed not to return to the statism of the 1970s and earlier, but to establish governments capable of creating and maintaining stability and rule of law that would encourage investment. In other words, the logic of good governance in no way challenged the underlying precepts that had driven `Washington consensus’-era policies across Africa. They were, in fact, designed to make those policies more realizable.</p>
          </gen-section>
          <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
               <heading>Ownership</heading>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P26">Accompanying the focus on the institutions and processes of recipient governments under the good governance agenda, donors looked to another (related) issue which they held responsible for poor development performance: ownership. Development, it was argued, would be more successful if recipients `owned’ the policy reforms and programmes they were implementing. The Paris Declaration of 2005, and the Accra Agenda for Action in 2008 requested that donors and recipient countries (now called `partners’ to emphasize this supposed conceptual shift) allow countries to exercise greater leadership over development policy and its implementation. Donors were expected to respect priorities set by partner countries, and to invest in their institutional capacity to deliver.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P27">Ownership was reflected in two new development mechanisms: PRSPs that governments were to draw up through a process of participatory discussions; and SWAPs that were developed in the 1990s to build government capacity in particular sectors such as health, education, agriculture, etc.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P28">PRSPs also built on a growing consensus that development interventions lacked local legitimacy (linking in through this to the good governance agenda), were too short-term in their focus, and failed to build on best practice. Accordingly, PRSPs were established on five key principles: they should be country-driven (enhancing local ownership); they were to be result-oriented; they were to be comprehensive in their definitions of poverty and assessment of the causes of that poverty; they were to be partnership-oriented (i.e. multi-stakeholder in delivery, bringing together public, private and volunteer sectors); and they were to adopt a long-term perspective in their planning. Built into the PRSP process was pro-poor planning: interventions, plans to encourage economic growth, efforts at diversification and increasing foreign direct investment, etc., were all to take into account the needs of the poorest. </p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P29">Under SWAPs, individual government ministries took responsibility for developing policy and managing expenditure, supported by the SWAP. National governments would establish priorities, engage with stakeholders in drawing up policies and programmes, and disperse and account for donor funding. Health ministries were to receive funds earmarked for public health projects; government agencies responsible for water and sanitation projects were once more put in charge of implementing schemes and programmes.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P30">
        The concept of ownership raised the issue of donor conditionality. How could national ownership of development be reconciled with donor conditions upon the use of aid? The World Bank and IMF continued to see no major contradiction between the two, but embedded with the Paris Declaration and subsequent agreements was a commitment to reduce 
        <i>ante-hoc</i>
         conditionality.
      </p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P31">
        Reducing conditions, embedding ownership over development policy, and building the institutional capacity of governments to manage and implement development were central planks of the London Agenda of the mid-2000s. Built around the confluence in 2005 of the publication of the Commission for Africa’s report, Jeffrey Sachs’s 
        <i>The End of Poverty</i>
        , and the Gleneagles Group of Eight leading industrial countries (G8) meeting, donors agreed that they would commit to increased aid flows to facilitate pro-poor development policies in line with the development objectives and priorities focused around the UN Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). All this seemed to reinforce the apparent commitment to building up the African state both through giving it greater control over development processes within its borders and increasing aid to support long-term programming, with African governments committing themselves in return to boosting their ability to undertake this challenge through improving their own governance institutions and processes in line with the good governance agenda.
      </p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P32">The result in the early years of the 21st century has been to revive the power of the state to manage development from its moribund condition of the late 1980s and early 1990s, but not so completely as seriously to challenge the power of those who hold the purse strings. The state has been resurgent, not victorious. Moreover, by the end of the 2000s the global financial crisis (which obliged donors to better account for aid delivery and results to an increasingly sceptical public), and perceptions of continued and growing endemic corruption in many of the so-called `donor darlings’ (such as Tanzania and Uganda) led to pressure on donors to return to more directed aid models, rather than the general budgetary support advocated so strongly at the start of the decade.</p>
          </gen-section>
          <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
               <heading>Rights, Security and Development</heading>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P33">If the period from the late 1990s saw a partial return to earlier notions of the role of the state in promoting and directing development, the scope of what the state was supposed to manage continued to evolve. One of the most significant of these shifts was the rights-based approach. During the 1980s human rights organizations began to consider issues of development as part of their mandate. At the same time non-governmental organizations and non-official development-sector workers began to consider how the poor and marginalized could best be guaranteed access to particular services and expectations. Gradually the two merged, creating an understanding that one central task of development was to ensure that all people had access to a range of services and opportunities to which all had a right under an emerging consensus of universal human rights. Thus the right to a certain level of education, to a particular level of health care and to a sustainable livelihood became not responsibilities of a national government to provide, but the right of all people to expect. By framing development objectives as `rights’, governments which had signed up to the new international treaties that were drafted throughout the 1990s could be held to account.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P34">
        The UN Development Programme’s 1994 
        <i>Human Development Report</i>
         introduced the notion of human security, which was to continue the broadening of the definition of poverty. Human security, the report suggested, consisted of seven areas: economic security, food security, health security, environmental security, personal security, community security and political security. Linked into this, government and international organizations were advised to focus on meeting `basic needs’ as part of a growing emphasis on meeting the needs of the poorest of the poor. These concerns found their way into the pro-poor planning systems that emerged in the mid- to late 1990s (and were encapsulated in the new PRSPs), and were incorporated into the formulation of the MDGs that were to shape development objectives from 2000.
      </p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P35">However, at the same time, a rival construction of the link between `security’ and `development’ emerged. With the rise of the securitization of development discourse in the 1990s, poverty and global security concerns became conflated. Development became increasingly defined as a global security concern, and interventions characterized as protecting Western interests from instability as much as reducing the impact of poverty on the poor and poor countries themselves. The result was that the social and economic concerns of donor agencies became increasingly intertwined with the security concerns of donor foreign policy. In the USA the State Department became an increasingly important deliverer of aid, with control over a significant aid budget. Military forces have become used with greater frequency in delivering aid and implementing programmes. Non-governmental organizations have expressed concern over the conflation of humanitarian and military objectives in intervention in conflicts, a process highlighted by the experiences of working in Somalia from 1992. This process continued into the 2000s, accelerated (but not initiated) by the September 2001 terrorist attacks in the USA.</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P36">It was not just poverty that was increasingly securitized: health issues too became imbued with a security prism. In 2000 the UN declared HIV/AIDS to constitute a security risk, while in 2002 the US National Intelligence Council released a report outlining the diseases presenting a potential security risk for US interests (the Central Intelligence Agency had suggested HIV/AIDS constituted such a threat as early as 1987, but for different, and as it turned out, unfounded, reasons).</p>
               <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P37">To return to the two questions that have formed the basis of development debates over the course of the past century—those of agency and of objective—one can see that the argument has come full circle in the case of the former. In current debates it is the state that is dominant in managing and implementing development. There is a broad consensus, however, that it must be a particular type of state: one that is transparent and democratic; that pursues sound macroeconomic management; that puts poverty alleviation and eradication at the heart of its agenda; that guarantees the rule of law; and that protects the rights of its citizens. In terms of the objectives towards which this state is oriented, however, the definition of development has continued to widen, incorporating new ideas, notions, priorities and trends. Development no longer means economic growth from which all else will flow: it incorporates broad social objectives; notions of people’s right to certain opportunities, services and levels of care; and issues of sustainability and security. Development has come to mean the creation of an entirely different society, where absolute poverty is eradicated, where all people have access to the same opportunities and where all live without fear. But `development’ in Africa is also presented as a means to ensure stability and security in the global North; and to ensure a more stable environment in which investors from the global North and rising powers such as China can be more certain of the safety of those investments. The question is whether these are complementary, or contradictory, claims for what development is and should be in Africa.</p>
          </gen-section>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.ESSAY.7.14671227821" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Aid and Development in Africa Today</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P38">At the turn of the century, the international community moved towards larger scale targets for eradicating poverty. The MDGs (2000–15) were a set of eight goals divided into specific targets around absolute poverty, hunger, education, and maternal and child mortality. In 2015 the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) replaced the MDGs: a wider set of 17 goals and 169 targets for tackling poverty, inequality, injustice and (seen as a critically important addition) the climate emergency by 2030. Both have been criticized for reinforcing the power of international organizations and donors in setting development priorities, and reducing the policy space for African governments to operate in.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P39">The SDGs marked a shift from `international’ to `global’ development. Under international development, power remained vested in donors and the global North, which controlled policy and funding, and situated the `problem’ to be addressed in the global South. Global development was built upon a principle that development problems were global, and that true collaboration and partnerships were essential to the eradication of poverty, improving lives and protecting the planet.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P40">Nevertheless, some continued to argue that the SDGs remained embedded in an economic growth model of development, with insufficient attention paid to the issue of inequalities in the distribution of, and access to, resources. Others argued that the model still gave too much power to institutions in the global North, and did not live up to its promise to share power more equitably. Despite these criticisms, the SDGs were deemed to have been successful in shaping global development priorities in Africa (and worldwide) until the events of 2020 forced a radical reorientation of those priorities.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P41">Progress was made towards the SDGs in 2015–20 in Africa, notably in relation to: SDG3 (good health and wellbeing); SDG4 (quality education); SDG6.1 (access to clean water); and SDG7.1 (access to electricity). However, even before the outbreak of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, concerns were growing about the relatively slow pace of progress in eradicating poverty (SDG1) and ending hunger (SDG2).</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P42">With global attention currently focused on how to manage the COVID-19 crisis, less attention has been paid to the longer-term implications for broader development. The most immediate impact of COVID-19 was on short- to medium-term development financing. With most official donor aid tied to gross national income, the economic impact of the pandemic was already reducing development finance before several donors (in particular the UK, Australia and Japan) reduced their official aid spending to prioritize their own economic needs.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P43">
      These cuts came at a time of increased requirement, as the pandemic reversed a general downward trend in global poverty, with the majority of countries likely to see this reversal over the medium term concentrated in sub-Saharan Africa
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.7..1596123051" ref-symbol="1" />
      . With sub-Saharan Africa as a region experiencing a recession as a result of the pandemic
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.7.1216382368" ref-symbol="2" />
      , and with a decline in global trade and investment in the region, millions will be pushed into poverty, and more people will be reliant on a declining trend in official development assistance.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P44">One consequence for global development is likely to be an increased focus on inequality, as the pandemic exacerbates existing, and creates new forms of, inequality and vulnerability. There is also likely to be a greater emphasis on social infrastructure and protection as against economic growth as a core focus for development interventions.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P45">The biggest shift, however, is likely to come from the impact of the climate emergency. As evidence of climate change induced crises continued to mount from the 2000s, in the form of the increased frequency of droughts, heavier rains and flooding, crop failures and shifting health environments as new areas became more conducive to disease carrying vectors, climate change mitigation is becoming increasingly central (although still not central enough) to global development policy and aid.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P46">The failure of many health, education and other systems during the COVID-19 crisis also drew increased attention to resilient systems, and systems capable of withstanding shocks and crises are only going to become more common as a result of the climate emergency.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>The Rise of New Development Actors?</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P47">
      In the late 2000s a new group of donors, largely from the emerging economies and led primarily by China, began to make a greater impact on African development and aid. At the beginning of 2006 China declared its intention to extend and deepen its links with sub-Saharan Africa, through its `Africa Policy’. Japan too has increased the scale of its commitment to sub-Saharan Africa, announcing in May 2008 that it would double its aid to Africa by 2012 to US&#160;$3,500m., as well as providing access to $4,000m. of low-interest rate loans. India and Saudi Arabia have also increased aid to Africa. Turkey, too, has used aid, alongside diplomacy, foreign investment and support for Islam, as a means to increase its presence across sub-Saharan Africa. Turkey spent around 1.1% of its gross national income (GNI) in development aid in 2018
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.7.1216382366" ref-symbol="3" />
      .
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P48">The rise of new donors, and China in particular, has caused concern among OECD donors over the potential impact on its policy of linking good governance, `pro-poor’ growth and development. China’s willingness to respect national sovereignty and internal political decisions is viewed in some quarters as giving rise to a `Beijing consensus’ that challenges the insistence of western donors on attaching conditions to development aid. Sudan and Zimbabwe, both recipients of significant amounts of Chinese aid, are held up as examples of how China is allegedly subverting international efforts to promote change.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P49">Although there was little prospect of new donors replacing the traditional OECD-group of donors (the Chinese Government, for example, is developing African programmes in partnership with the World Bank), some have detected a return to the Cold War politics of aid and development, where aid was used as a diplomatic and strategic tool for leveraging support.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>From Regions to Fragile States</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P50">If from the mid-2000s the focus amongst donors on global development challenges had turned, in rhetoric if not always followed by the money, to sub-Saharan Africa, in the mid-2010s gains (questionable as some may be) made during the MDG process in reducing certain markers of poverty, and the rise of former low-income states (including Ghana, Nigeria, Zambia, Senegal and Cameroon) to middle-income country (MIC) status or near middle-income status—Kenya, Rwanda, Sierra Leone and Zimbabwe are forecast to become MICs by 2025—led to new questions about aid. In particular, whether aid should be more targeted at the remaining pockets of extreme poverty—colloquially known as fragile and conflict states. Fragile states and conflict states were more likely, donors argued, to be tipped into a crisis as a result of adverse economic, social, political or environmental events. Moreover, they were less able to escape the cycle of crisis and poverty and move towards middle-income status. </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P51">
      However, middle-income status, which formally begins when economies reach the US&#160;$1,005 per capita GNI mark, is problematic as a guide for aid flows. Firstly, the benchmark is still very low, and recent entries to that group are still poor by global standards. Gabon is in theory well above the MIC threshold, for example, with a per capita GNI of $6,610
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.7.121638264645" ref-symbol="4" />
      . Yet almost one-third of its population remains vulnerable; under-5 mortality is 47.4 per 1,000 live births, which is lower than low-income country Tanzania (57 per 1,000 births)
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.7.121638238897" ref-symbol="5" />
       but not substantially so. Similarly, GNI per head for Equatorial Guinea is $8,250
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.7.1564752129" ref-symbol="6" />
      , but immunization rates for measles are just 30%; the under-5 mortality rate is 90.9 per 1,000 live births; and one-quarter of the population do not have access to an improved water source
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.7.1626858895" ref-symbol="7" />
      . Middle-income status can therefore hide ongoing vulnerability. Secondly, the concept of `fragile state’ has increasingly engaged with pockets of internal fragility, further undermining national-based assessments. Thirdly, how a country has reached middle-income status is important. Mature MICs such as Botswana, Mauritius and South Africa have had longer transitions to ensure their economies are resilient, and their governments are able to respond to domestic development needs (although, as South Africa has shown over the past decade, this is not unproblematic).
    </p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Conclusion: The Challenge for the Future</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P52">To return to the question posed at the beginning of the essay: has development failed in Africa? It is true that many human development indicators remain poor, and millions remain affected by hunger, easily treatable health issues, and lack of access to resources and services, which together undermine their capacity to escape poverty. The story of development also appears to be one in which voices from Africa have been silenced by successive external powers. But, as ever, external aid and development policy devised in the USA and in Europe is but one aspect of Africa’s hope for the future. Ultimately the answers lie, as they always have, within the continent itself. Development policy has too often been implemented with the interests of non-Africans at its heart. Policies have been started and abruptly stopped as trends and debates have shifted. The developed world has forced African countries to accept free markets while continuing to impose restrictions in their own. But through the constantly shifting international policies, the citizens of Africa have sought to improve their daily lives in small, incremental ways.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.7.P53">This essay has focused on the broad debates and shifting agendas in African development. However, it would be wrong to conclude that the sole story of development is located there. Self-help and community groups across Africa, civil society organizations, local faith and secular development groups have undertaken local schemes and projects with little, if any, external assistance. Colonial and international policies have been resisted and refined by those living with the consequences. African governments have in the recent past sought to address in concert some of the problems facing the continent. Through the establishment of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, the African Union, the creation of an African peacekeeping force, through free trade zones and other institutional unions, Africa is gradually restoring a measure of control over its own destiny. Of course, not all is positive. Corruption and violence continue to undermine development efforts. Violent conflict takes its toll in life and human misery. The lack of resources means many states are unable to meet their commitments, even where willing. However, should, as the past tells us is likely, the world avoid its responsibilities and once more push African poverty to the back of the international agenda, the prospects for development and poverty alleviation will continue to lie with Africans themselves.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Footnotes</heading>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.7..1596123051" ref-symbol="1">Kharas, H., and Dooley, M. `Long-run impacts of COVID-19 on extreme poverty’. www.brookings.edu/blog/future-development/2021/06/02/long-run-impacts-of-covid-19-on-extreme-poverty, 2 June 2021. Accessed 21 July 2021.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.7.1216382368" ref-symbol="2">World Bank. `World Bank confirms economic downturn in sub-Saharan Africa’. www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2020/10/08/world-bank-confirms-economic-downturn-in-sub-saharan-africa-outlines-key-polices-needed-for-recovery, 8 October 2020. Accessed 21 July 2021.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.7.1216382366" ref-symbol="3">OECD. `Development aid drops in 2018, especially to neediest countries’. www.oecd.org/newsroom/development-aid-drops-in-2018-especially-to-neediest-countries.htm, 10 April 2019. Accessed 30 July 2020.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.7.121638264645" ref-symbol="4">data.worldbank.org/country/gabon</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.7.121638238897" ref-symbol="5">data.unicef.org/country/gab/</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.7.1564752129" ref-symbol="6">data.worldbank.org/country/equatorial-guinea</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.7.1626858895" ref-symbol="7">data.unicef.org/country/gnq/</endnote>
     </gen-section>
</essay>