<?xml version="1.0"?>
<essay id="ASS.ESSAY.40" id-root="ass.essay.40" iso="" region="ASS" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ESSAY-REF" usage="ass" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
     <heading>An Analysis of the Rule of Law in Sub-Saharan Africa</heading>
     <alt-heading type="SECTION-LONG-UPPERCASE" usage="ass">General Survey</alt-heading>
     <alt-heading type="COUNTRY-SHORT-TITLECASE" usage="ass">An Analysis of the Rule of Law in Sub-Saharan Africa</alt-heading>
     <author-group>
          <primary-authors>
               <person-name>
                    <forename>Leighann</forename>
                    <surname>Spencer</surname>
                    <regnal>PhD candidate, Charles Sturt University, Australia, and Tutor in Justice Studies, La Trobe University, Australia</regnal>
               </person-name>
          </primary-authors>
     </author-group>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Introduction</heading>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P1">The rule of law, in its simplest connotation, accords the law supremacy and sees it applied to all persons, institutions and entities, including the state itself. The characteristics of the rule of law include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:</p>
          <gen-list>
               <item>i) the law must be adopted through an established process;</item>
               <item>ii) the law must be transparent and accessible;</item>
               <item>iii) the law must be consistently applied (certainty before the law); </item>
               <item>iv) the law must be applied with procedural fairness;</item>
               <item>v) that no one is above the law (all are equal before the law).</item>
          </gen-list>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P2">This essay will first outline the ideas and debates floated about the rule of law before providing an overview as to how modern sub-Saharan Africa has fared on upholding this ideal. It will then delve deeper into key components of the rule of law with specific case studies from the continent, and a discussion as to why failures to uphold said components have occurred. Stemming from the case studies, it will identify some of the broader consequences of the breakdown of the rule of law. Finally, this essay provides recommendations as to promoting the rule of law in sub-Saharan Africa </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P3">
      The rule of law as both a theoretical and practical concept is contentious. The origin of the concept is elusive; the phrase has been stated to have been in use since the 17th century, from John Locke’s 
      <i>Two Treatises of Government</i>
      , becoming popular from the 19th century with the works of Albert Venn Dicey. However, the philosophical underpinnings can be drawn back to the likes of Aristotle in ancient Greece. This Westernized version of the history of the rule of law is a point of contention, with the argument that components of the rule of law can be found throughout many societies and cultures over the ages. This is an important consideration, as perceptions of the rule of law as a Western concept can have implications for its implementation in African (and other) nations.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P4">For now, it is safe to say that the concept has somewhat existed globally for centuries. Yet what it entails is hardly settled. That is not to say the idea itself is contested; as put by Stewart (2004, p. 136), the rule of law is generally seen as necessary `because if we stop believing in it, the ideals that it represents will cease to exist and the practical effects would be disastrous’. Rather, it is the scope and utility that are still subject to debate. In terms of scope, some restrict the concept to a formalist framework, while others look to substantive frameworks. The formalist framework posits that the rule of law requires certain procedural attributes, these being transparent and accessible laws, an effective judicial system and effective law enforcement agencies. The substantive framework broadens this to examine the ends to the means of the rule of law, conflating the concept with other liberal ideals such as democracy and human rights.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P5">Related to this is the utility of the rule of law. As some argue, upholding procedural attributes does not necessarily equal a good political regime nor provide an effective model for assessing performance. Those most critical, for instance within Marxist and feminist fields of thought, consider it as a legitimating ideology that serves the class-or-gender-based function of the law. The same can be said for regimes of systematic racism and religious intolerance. As such, there have been calls for the abolishment of the `outdated’ concept. Conversely, many prefer to turn to the substantive approach to consider the actual content and consequences of law. For instance, the United Nations (UN) addresses the rule of law by its intersection with three pillars: peace and security; human rights; and development. Several protocols, including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, include aspects of both formalist and substantive rule of law. This essay does not intend to dismiss potential shortcomings of the rule of law, nor the importance of related liberal ideals. However, for sake of space and clarity, it largely analyses the components of the rule of law across sub-Saharan Africa in the formalist sense.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P6">Before doing so it is important to return to the perception of the rule of law as a Western-centric import that has no application to countries such as those in Africa, or that it may be a neocolonial assertion of control or suppression. To combat such perceptions, African scholars have drawn attention to alternate histories of the concept and how it can be underscored by African values such as Ubuntu, and to the recent use of the rule of law to obtain liberation, good governance and human rights. Indeed, the African Union’s (AU) Agenda 2063 envisions the rule of law as a precursor to broader ideals, and the rule of law is embedded in regional protocols such as the African Charter on Human Rights and the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance. It is imperative that one considers the African context when addressing the rule of law on the continent.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>How Does Sub-Saharan Africa Fare on the Rule of Law?</heading>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P7">
      As an elusive concept, the rule of law is difficult to measure. Several indexes monitoring democracy, development, and human rights include it as an indicator, considering factors such as judicial independence, due process, access to information, and equality in laws and politics
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.105115062020" ref-symbol="1" />
      . Most pertinently, the World Justice Project (WJP) specifically monitors the rule of law worldwide and will be the mode of general measure here. Its annual Rule of Law Index looks at eight factors: constraints on government powers, being effective limitation of executive over-reach; absence of corruption in all government branches; open government, including access to information and complaint processes; fundamental rights; order and security surrounding crime and conflict; regulatory enforcement, being effective administrative proceedings; effective civil justice; and effective criminal justice.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P8">Across 140 countries ranked in the 2022 Rule of Law Index, Rwanda (42nd), Mauritius (45th) and Namibia (46th) are the only African countries to make the top 50. In the bottom 25 countries, sub-Saharan Africa is represented by the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC, 137th), Cameroon (134th), Mauritania (131st), Uganda (128th), Gabon (126th), Sudan (125th), Zimbabwe (124th), Ethiopia (123rd), Mozambique (122nd), the Republic of the Congo (120th), Nigeria (118th) and Guinea (117th). The majority of countries in the region saw a decrease or no change in the rule of law since the year prior. Those with the largest decreases were Ethiopia and Sudan. This snapshot shows that a lack of rule of law is a pervasive problem across sub-Saharan Africa.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P9">According to the WJP, notably worrying trends across sub-Saharan Africa are: corruption; lack of sanctions for official misconduct; lack of constraint on government powers and influence; declining respect for fundamental rights including due process; ineffective law enforcement; and unreasonable delays in obtaining justice. These have been exacerbated by new state powers and the diversion of resources to combat COVID-19. These trends can be linked to the formalist framework and the three procedural aspects necessary for rule of law. These are:</p>
          <gen-list>
               <item>i) effective judicial systems;</item>
               <item>ii) effective law enforcement agencies (both these and the judicial systems must be honest, impartial, and able to provide procedural fairness and certainty and equality before the law, and be in place alongside);</item>
               <item>iii) transparent and accessible law, including access to information as well as access to the judicial system and law enforcement.</item>
          </gen-list>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P10">These would also reduce the likelihood for violence which occurs when conventional methods are considered illegitimate. The following sections take a closer look at the three procedural aspects in modern sub-Saharan Africa.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Judicial Effectiveness</heading>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P11">
      Arguably, an effective judicial system is the foremost attribute to engender the rule of law via application of laws in a procedural, consistent, and equal manner. It is a vital mechanism for oversight, and thus central to judicial effectiveness is that it remains an autonomous authority. A core principle of democracy is the separation of powers: the requirement of an executive arm; a legislative arm; and a judicial arm of government, all of which are independent and thus can provide checks and balances against one another. The separation of legislative and executive powers was expounded by Locke as key to the rule of law, with Montesquieu including the judiciary soon after in 
      <i>The Spirit of Laws</i>
      . Despite being a long-held principle, a regular concern when it comes to the rule of law in Africa is executive over-reach. This section focuses on executive interference into the judiciary with reference to Peter VonDoepp and Rachel Ellett’s six tactics.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P12">
      The first tactic is general institutional assaults. This involves institutional restructuring to restrict the issues a court can rule on, the bypassing of the judiciary, or a failure to abide by its rulings. This tactic is ripe across sub-Saharan Africa. For instance, in Nigeria, it has been calculated that former President Muhammadu Buhari ignored court decisions on at least 40 occasions throughout his tenure
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.105315062020" ref-symbol="2" />
      . These included ignoring release orders for Islamic Movement of Nigeria leader Sheikh Ibrahim Zakzaky, who was held in unlawful detention for over six years. While he was finally discharged in July 2021, there have been continued efforts to delay court proceedings to provide Zakzaky and his wife with passports to obtain medical attention abroad, leading to large-scale `free Zakzaky’ protests. Buhari has also ignored orders to divulge financial details in relation to corruption allegations.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P13">
      In Ethiopia, Prime Minister Dr Abiy Ahmed Ali has ignored court decisions, largely related to the recent civil war. In 2020 seven Oromo opposition leaders were arrested and detained. Both regional and federal courts have ordered their release, yet they remain in detention without charge three years later, with serious impacts on their health and wellbeing
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.105415062020" ref-symbol="3" />
      . Journalists who documented crimes committed in the Tigray and Oromia regions have also been held for months despite release orders. In addition, legislation has been passed which denies the judiciary any avenue of executive oversight. In short, institutional assaults create impunity for some, and a lack of due process for others.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P14">
      The second tactic is personal manipulation, which revolves around judicial appointments, primarily by appointing judges who support the executive and purging those who make dissenting decisions. In several sub-Saharan countries, judges—or at least the highest echelons of the judiciary—are explicitly appointed by the executive. These include Rwanda, Angola, Cameroon, Senegal, Mali, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea and Eritrea
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.105615062020" ref-symbol="4" />
      . This is a direct subversion of the separation of powers and thus the rule of law. By appointing judges, the executive can ensure arbiters are those who will make decisions in line with the regime’s will. For instance, in Gabon, Marie-Madeleine Mborantsuo has been the President of the Constitutional Court since its inception in 1991, and prior to that was President of the Supreme Court. Mborantsuo was the mistress of Omar Bongo Ondimba, former President of Gabon and father of the recently deposed President Ali Bongo Ondimba. She has played a direct role in numerous controversial decisions.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P15">In other sub-Saharan countries, the tactic of personal manipulation is more covert. In Kenya the independent Judicial Service Commission (JSC) nominates judges and lawyers. However, they are then sworn in by the executive. In 2019 President Uhuru Kenyatta refused to swear in 41 nominees on the grounds of `integrity concerns’—and this was not the first occasion on which this had happened. When the JSC requested further details it was refused, and the case was taken to court. In February 2020 the High Court ordered the executive to swear in the judges and lawyers within 14 days. This was not carried out until June 2021—whereupon Kenyatta still refused six of the 41 nominees—demonstrating an overlap of personal manipulation and institutional assaults. Kenyatta’s successor, William Ruto, finally appointed the last six nominees in 2022.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P16">The third tactic used by the executive to interfere with the judiciary is remuneration manipulation, or the control of judicial salaries to reward or punish personnel. Although difficult to ascertain exact instances of remuneration manipulation, the majority of African judiciaries depend on the executive for their budgets, affecting salaries alongside overall efficiency. In 2018 Kenyatta reduced the Kenyan judicial budget by US&#160;$30m., purportedly in retaliation for the court’s 2017 annulment of the presidential election results. In 2019 the budget was again cut by $29m., although this was restored in 2020 just days after the Chief Justice accused the executive of deliberately undermining the judiciary. Nevertheless, tensions remained as shown above.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P17">
      The fourth tactic used by the executive to interfere with the judiciary is personal attacks; the public badgering of, or personal threats against, judicial personnel by the head of state or government or other politicians. This can include investigations or threats of investigations, all which work to delegitimize or intimidate the judiciary. For instance, in 2023 the Ugandan regime commenced an investigation into a Supreme Court Justice following her alignment with opposition leader Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu’s (known as Bobi Wine) court petition regarding the 2021 presidential election. This came after a year-long pause of her salary and benefits, alongside remarks made by Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni in which he claimed that judicial independence was being abused by judicial officials
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.111315062020" ref-symbol="5" />
      .
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P18">Personal attacks can be found elsewhere. In South Africa the judiciary is regularly criticized by members of the ruling African National Congress (ANC). Although in this context, former President and ANC member Jacob Zuma was held to account for contempt of court in 2021 and sentenced to 15 months imprisonment. The Court stated that his `scurrilous and unfounded attacks on the judiciary and its members were intolerable and could not be met with impunity’. This conviction demonstrated the importance of an independent judiciary and was considered a win for the rule of law. None the less, personal attacks are damaging, and can even turn physical as seen with the 2020 murder of a DRC judge who presided over the corruption trial of the President’s former chief of staff Vital Kamerhe. After the murder Kamerhe was acquitted, and he will now present himself as a candidate in the 2023 presidential election.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P19">The fifth and sixth tactics identified by VonDoepp and Ellett are patronage, and personal links and communications. The former relates to the presence of patronage politics and how this can extend to the judiciary as a form of control; the latter concerns structural links such as regular consultations between the executive and the judiciary. In Equatorial Guinea patronage politics has created a judicial system loyal to President Gen. (retd) Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, and has played a role in him becoming the longest-serving president in the world. In Angola senior judicial positions are often filled by those with personal links to the ruling party. We can also see this in the case of Gabon’s Mborantsuo. Material coercion and secret consultations with the judiciary by both those within and outside of government is further problematic. This all impacts the ability of the judiciary to make fair and consistent decisions based on law.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P20">
      These categories are comprehensive and cover various types of interference which occur in sub-Saharan Africa. However, some have criticized the focus on `judicial interference’, arguing that in some countries there is no judicial arm of government to begin with. As Kamga (2019, p. 60) argues: `if the executive power in Cameroon was to interfere with the judiciary, it would be similar to colluding with its own shadow’. The same could be said for all of the above-mentioned countries in which judges are explicitly appointed by the executive. Cameroon is such a country as Section 37(3) of the Constitution provides the President with the power to `appoint members of the [judicial] bench and for the legal department’. This has been the case since independence in 1960; executive control of the judiciary is well and truly entrenched. Such control has contributed to the marginalization of those from the anglophone regions, and by extension, to the current conflict in the nation
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.111515062020" ref-symbol="6" />
      . 
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P21">Cameroon is also a prime example of executive control of the legislative arm. Laws are more often than not adopted by presidential decree rather than through established legislative procedure. When the legislature is involved, it largely acts merely to rubber stamp the wishes of President Paul Biya. Rule by decree further became a concern worldwide when countries enacted state of emergencies to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic. Although allowing extraordinary executive powers is a routine response to emergencies, it is ripe for exploitation, as has been the case in countries such as Togo, Guinea, the DRC, Rwanda, Angola, Zimbabwe and Malawi. In this last the virus could not have emerged at a better time for President Mutharika, who was facing nationwide protests and general unpopularity in the lead up to the June 2020 presidential election re-run. Immediately after declaring a state of emergency, Mutharika used his extraordinary powers to ban opposition protests and rallies. </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P22">The fact that Malawi re-ran an election is, however, an example of good judicial workings. The May 2019 presidential election was beset with irregularities, and in February 2020, the Constitutional Court nullified the results and demanded that the poll be reheld. In May the Supreme Court upheld this decision. In June, just days before the election re-run was to take place, the Government placed the Chief Justice and the second most senior justice on leave pending retirement. This attempt at personal manipulation was overturned after an extensive backlash. The repeat poll, held on 23 June, resulted in a victory for the opposition candidate, Dr Lazarus Chakwera, who secured 59.3% of the valid votes cast, and was well received by Malawians. The role of the judiciary in facilitating the election re-run followed in the footsteps of Kenya, where the Supreme Court annulled the 2017 presidential election due to irregularities. As shown, both countries’ judiciaries faced executive backlash for these decisions. This substantiates a common proposition as to why the executive chooses to interfere with the judiciary: the judicialization of politics.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P23">
      This refers to the extent to which judiciaries become arbitrators in political decisions and their behaviour when doing so
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.171801082022" ref-symbol="7" />
      . Interestingly, research has also shown that it is when judiciaries are quasi-independent that post-election violence is most likely to flare as an annulment is perceived possible but only with public assertion. Such violence has been apparent in both Malawi and Kenya in the lead up to annulments. This highlights the need for full independence of the courts in order to promote democracy without the need for violent redress. None the less, Malawi and Kenya have set important precedents for judiciaries as a check against state power and thus as guardians of the rule of law. However, there are certainly many instances in sub-Saharan Africa where irregular elections have been upheld by courts which are fully non-independent.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P24">
      In Gabon decisions by Mborantsuo have included upholding fraudulent election results in favour of the Bongo family, likely to continue should the need occur in the 2023 presidential election. Indeed, the executive appointment of judges has had a direct impact on democratic electoral processes. In Uganda Bobi Wine attempted to contest the 2021 re-election of President Yoweri Museveni, but later withdrew his case citing court bias, evidenced by the subsequent attacks on the dissenting Justice. In a similar vein, non-independent courts have seen the extension of presidential term limits, a successful strategy in 22 African countries since 2000
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.111615062020" ref-symbol="8" />
      . The 2018 removal of the age limit in Uganda, upheld by the Supreme Court, paved the way for Museveni to rule for life. In 2015 in Burundi the Constitutional Court upheld the right of Pierre Nkurunziza to run for a third presidential term; it was subsequently revealed that the judges had been forced into this decision. Both Uganda and Burundi have experienced ongoing unrest with serious human rights violations as a result. This is a notable trend when term limits are prolonged, with the latest casualties being the Central African Republic and Senegal in 2023. This shows how failures of the rule of law can stunt the promotion of broader liberal ideals.
    </p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Police Effectiveness</heading>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P25">Just as effective judiciaries are vital for the rule of law to function, so are the gatekeepers to the justice system: the police. And similar to judiciaries, police effectiveness is hindered by issues of corruption, patronage, and low budgets. These issues affect certainty and equality before the law, not to mention procedural fairness, arguably the most visible failure of the rule of law across many African nations. It is important to note that these issues can be found in other state security agencies such as the military. However, the focus here is on police forces.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P26">
      A 2022 survey by LexisNexis showed that 52% of respondents viewed corruption as the biggest impediment to the rule of law in Africa, with 6% stating that this increased with the COVID-19 pandemic. Corruption is perceived to be greatest amongst police forces, with citizens often having to pay bribes to receive services. This is related to patronage, which creates security for the highest bidder and has been observed in several countries such as Uganda, Kenya, the DRC, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and South Africa
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.111715062020" ref-symbol="9" />
      . For instance, the Zondo Commission of Inquiry (COI) in South Africa, better known as the Commission into State Capture, which concluded in January 2022, aimed to reveal the extent to which state organs and resources have been appropriated to enrich private citizens causing a collapse in state functions for the majority. The Zondo COI included investigations into criminal justice mechanisms such as the South African Police Service (SAPS). Witness testimonies alleged that SAPS runs on a network of patronage and is compromised at the highest levels: promotions are based on favours to senior officers, who make corrupt deals with service providers, while resources are diverted to protect the elite in and outside of SAPS, and this goes unfettered as officers are forced to play the game or resign. As tracked by the Democratic Alliance party, little action has been taken on these findings
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.111815062020" ref-symbol="10" />
      .
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P27">While the South African elite are protected and enriched by the SAPS, disparities are perpetuated among the general population. In 2019 a ground-breaking judgement was made by the Western Cape Equality Court: the allocation of police resources in the province discriminated against people on the basis of race and socioeconomic status. This stemmed from evidence revealed during the O’Regan COI which concluded in 2014. For instance, whereas the affluent, predominantly white Camps Bay area had a police to population ratio of 1:113, the poor, predominantly black Harare area ratio was 1:719. However, again, despite the O’Regan COI and the Equality Court judgement, change has yet to be shown. What has been shown is how this affects order and security, as those areas with low police resources have the highest crime rates.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P28">Policing inequalities can be seen elsewhere, such as in Nigeria where the average police to population ratio is 1:500, and over one-quarter of police personnel are delegated as personal guards for the wealthy. Corruption is rampant here also. During the COVID-19 lockdowns and restrictions on movement, both police and military officials were reported to have taken bribes to allow people to pass through checkpoints. At the same time, a young man was killed in Warri after he failed to stop at a checkpoint. This highlights the lack of certainty and equality before the law. As to police budgets designated by the executive, this can perpetuate issues: for example, poor salaries result in officers turning to alternate payment routes, and poor regional funds see an unequal distribution across stations. And again, to reiterate the above point, ineffective law enforcement and security agencies lead to poor order and security, as seen with the spate of kidnappings and armed burglaries, and the enduring herder–farmer conflict and Boko Haram insurgency in Nigeria.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P29">In addition to, and often related to, the above factors, is the lack of due process displayed by police across the continent. This includes the exertion of excessive force, arbitrary arrests, and illegal detention. Excessive force was utilized to enforce COVID-19 lockdowns in countries such as Nigeria, Kenya, Rwanda and South Africa. Within five days of the announcement of Nigeria’s lockdown in April 2020, 18 people had been extrajudicially killed by the police, including the young man in Warri, and a further 105 human rights violations were reported. By the time the lockdown ended in May, more Nigerians had died at the hands of the police than had died due to COVID-19. It has been speculated that the heavy-handed lockdown enforcement will impact community-police relations far beyond the pandemic. Indeed, longstanding grievances against the Nigerian Special Anti-Robbery Squad (SARS) resurfaced in late 2020 during the Black Lives Matter protests elsewhere. The Nigerian protests, dubbed #EndSARS, were met with live bullets killing at least 12. Over 1,500 were arrested, and the media was restricted from reporting on the issue. Although the Government eventually agreed to disband the SARS, its mandate and personnel were allocated elsewhere, and police brutality still prevails. As such, the #EndSARS movement continues with the goal of overall police reform.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P30">
      It is important to recognize that although carried out under a new pretext during COVID-19, the countries noted for excessive police force were not facing new or isolated cases. In 2020 in Kenya a total of 168 people were killed by police—compared to 145 in 2019 (pre-COVID-19) and 219 (2020) and then 130 (2021) in the two years following the lifting of restrictions
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.1694700757" ref-symbol="11" />
      . During anti-government protests in July 2023, there were at least 27 people killed by police over the period of just five days. There was also a notorious incident in which 53 children had to be hospitalized after police shot teargas directly into their classroom. These protests held a political element being organized by the opposition coalition against the economic policies of President Ruto.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P31">Arbitrary arrests and detention have too become commonplace to ruling regimes when dealing with opposition. In Zimbabwe, the crackdown on opposition to the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union—Patriotic Front intensified in the lead up to August 2023 presidential election. In January the police raided a Citizens Coalition for Change (CCC) meeting, physically assaulting members and arresting 25 people on the trumped-up charge of intent to promote violence. In separate incidents, two members of the CCC were arrested and convicted for criticizing the Government. Furthermore, in April the leader of Transform Zimbabwe was sentenced to 36 months in prison for leading the 2020 anti-corruption protests, which were quashed by the police and saw other activists targeted. In July 2023 the Government signed into law the `Patriotic Bill’ which further criminalizes dissent. There was widespread concern that the outcome of the election would spark police violence like that of the 2018 elections where six people were killed and 35 injured.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P32">
      Another example of state-sponsored violence is that of Ethiopia, where ethno-political tensions have consistently resulted in abuse by various security agencies. In 2020 this exploded into a civil war with the federal intention to eradicate the Tigray People’s Liberation Front. Fighting largely occurred in Tigray and the neighbouring Afar and Amhara regions, with reports of massacres and widespread sexual violence. The Peace Research Institute Oslo found that it was the deadliest conflict of 2022, with over 100,000 people killed that year alone
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.1694700901" ref-symbol="12" />
      . In addition, over 3.14m. people were displaced. In November 2022 a truce agreement was signed. However, Tigrayans across the country continue to be arbitrarily arrested, detained and tortured, with Human Rights Watch calling it an ethnic cleansing
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.1694701048" ref-symbol="13" />
      . The truce is contentious, and should the conflict end, it is almost certain that inequality before the law will remain. Indeed, in sub-Saharan Africa, large scale abuses by police and other security agencies are often due to longstanding identity politics, highlighting the impacts on broader liberal ideals.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P33">
      Another impacted liberal ideal is that of press freedom
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.1694701120" ref-symbol="14" />
      . Journalists have been threatened and arrested in Ethiopia for covering the aforementioned abuses, with 19 detained as of July 2023. In Cameroon’s Anglophone conflict, journalists have also been targeted for covering state abuses and thus far in 2023 two journalists have been killed here in their line of work, two have been forcibly disappeared, four were in detention, and many more have been harassed. Similar tactics have been used to protect the ruling regimes in countries such as Uganda, Nigeria, the DRC, Mozambique, The Gambia, Zimbabwe, Burundi, Rwanda, Burkina Faso and Eritrea. These cases demonstrate the influence of executive over-reach on the justice system.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P34">The issues hindering police effectiveness as outlined in this section impact certainty and equality before the law, and procedural fairness for citizens in many sub-Saharan African countries. While police forces may see disregarding the rule of law as a necessary trade-off for order and security, research shows that order and security is inextricably linked to upholding the rule of law. Finally, it should be stressed that police accountability is practically non-existent. There are various reasons for this, such as lack of evidence, poor resources and regulations for investigation and prosecution, state interference, unwilling witnesses due to fear of retaliation, and the fact that it is generally police investigating police. In essence, this means that the police are often held above the law.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Accessible Law</heading>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P35">The final precondition to formalist rule of law is that the law must be transparent and accessible. This is often conceptualized as access to justice. The issues described thus far regarding judicial and police effectiveness not only create inequalities and uncertainty before the law; they also affect access to justice. Afrobarometer surveys reveal disturbing figures conveying a lack of access to justice across Africa. One survey, which looked at perceptions of police, found that 56% of respondents who had been victims of crime did not report it due to the belief that the police could not/would not help or would demand a bribe. In addition, 59% of overall respondents stated that it was not easy to obtain assistance from the police, and 32% stated that women were faced with unequal treatment by police.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P36">Another Afrobarometer survey, which looked at perceptions of the courts, found that 43% of respondents trusted the courts `not at all’ or `just a little’. Of those who had contact with courts, 30% had paid a bribe, 38% had been unable to pay legal costs and 47% could not understand legal procedures. Furthermore, 60% had experienced long delays. In terms of demographics, low socioeconomic class was the greatest indicator of poor access to legal redress, while residing in a rural area also played a role. These issues have been exacerbated by COVID-19. Most countries either suspended or severely limited court proceedings, impeding access to justice particularly for these demographics, such as those without internet where proceedings moved online. (A total of 16 African countries have less than one-quarter of their population online.) Backlogs endured once the courts returned to full capacity. For example, in 2022 a Ugandan judge noted that `in the Court of Appeals we have for the 11 justices a workload of about 7,500 to 8,000 matters sitting on our tables’. For these reasons, many Africans avoid court contact.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P37">
      COVID-19 restrictions also obstructed legal assistance. For instance, in Zimbabwe lawyers were not considered an essential service and thus could not meet with clients. A lack of access to information is a major problem. When citizens are unaware of their legal rights, or when there is a lack of transparency around the law and government actions, neither formalist rule of law nor other liberal ideals, such as development, democracy and human rights, can be realized. These ideals are stated in the African Platform on Access to Information Declaration of 2011, overseen by the UN and the AU. Yet in 2023 only 27 out of 55 AU member states had access to information laws
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.1694701219" ref-symbol="15" />
      . These are not always effective either. For instance, South Africa has, in theory, a good Access to Information Act. However, in practice, there is little knowledge of this legislation among the public, and poor record keeping has led to many refusals to provide information. In an extreme case, the Zimbabwe Access to Information Act has been predominantly used to stifle press freedom rather than uphold accessibility.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P38">
      One could also consider issues such as attacks on press freedom and internet shutdowns as detrimental to access to information and thus the rule of law. As tracked by Access Now, sub-Saharan Africa experienced nine internet shutdowns across seven countries in 2022
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.1694700774" ref-symbol="16" />
      . Despite being a record low since tracking began in 2016, this included the world’s longest shutdown in the Tigray region of Ethiopia. This shutdown is ongoing after two-and-a-half years, and there have been shutdowns in other Ethiopian regions in 2023. Other countries that experienced internet shutdowns in 2022 included Uganda, Burkina Faso, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Nigeria and Zimbabwe, largely as responses to protests and political events. There were some positive occurrences, with Kenya and The Gambia keeping the internet on during elections despite a history of doing otherwise. None the less, restricting internet access, alongside press freedom which has been relayed, conceals state wrongdoing and reduces access to justice. All three of the procedural attributes of the rule of law are inter-related and have considerable impacts on society.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P39">Thus far, some of the consequences of rule of law failures have been given, alluding to the substantive approach. As mentioned, a comprehensive overview is outside the scope of this essay. None the less, the link to broader ideals cannot be ignored. Dereliction of rule of law attributes have undoubtedly played a role in unrest, conflict, and even civil war in sub-Saharan Africa. Furthermore, such circumstances can then hamper the rule of law for years to come. A prime example is that of Sierra Leone, with which it has been argued that corruption, patronage politics and executive over-reach set the scene for the 1991 civil war. Despite the war coming to an end in 2002, there are lasting deficiencies within the police and judicial system. Sierra Leone and neighbouring Liberia, which experienced two civil wars between 1989 and 2003, ranked worst in the recent Afrobarometer surveys suggesting that post-conflict states face the greatest challenges to access to justice.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P40">
      Another consequence of inaccessible law is that it is motivation for the use of vigilantism to obtain justice and provide security. Judicial and police ineffectiveness (particularly the latter) has been cited in vigilantism studies from 
      <i>inter alia</i>
       South Africa, Zimbabwe, Rwanda, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Liberia. To grasp the extent of the problem, one can look to South Africa where the SAPS includes murder by vigilantism in their annual crime statistics, recording 1,202 in the most recent report. The actual count would be higher, as it can be difficult to discern which killings are due to vigilantism, and it excludes punitive actions which have not resulted in death such as beatings and banishment. Vigilantism in South Africa and elsewhere has been found to most likely occur in rural areas and amongst those of low socioeconomic class, and these are factors which also serve as indicators for lack of access to conventional justice. On a related point, as the Afrobarometer surveys indicate, citizens often prefer to turn to traditional justice mechanisms. However, one must not disregard traditional justice in the upholding of rule of law, as will be discussed in the following section.
    </p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.ESSAY.40.16246368131" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>What Can Be Done to Improve the Rule of Law in Sub-Saharan Africa? </heading>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P41">Considering the extent of issues in sub-Saharan Africa, improving the rule of law may appear a daunting task. Naturally, with many of the discussed problems being so entrenched there is a need to address underlying governmental culture and even perceptions amongst the general population. None the less, there is a case for optimism, with 40% of the 2022 LexisNexis survey respondents holding the belief that the rule of law will&#160;improve in their home jurisdictions over the next five years. Research does show concrete actions that can be taken to improve judicial effectiveness, police effectiveness and access to the law. This section outlines such actions with an emphasis on the African context. Although there is undoubtedly a role to be played by international, and particularly regional, institutions, the focus here is implementation on the national level.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P42">The most immediate hindrance to judicial effectiveness is executive interference and there is a need for urgent reform to the practice of arbitrary appointments by the executive. Countries where the judiciary is fully non-independent are those which do not have a separate commission for judicial appointments. Placing the mandate onto independent persons is imperative: this could consist of experts in the judicial field, or of persons nominated by a democratic public process. Quotas for representation could further assist in improving the rule of law. Any commission must also be responsible for judicial discipline and transfers. However, independence from the executive should not detract from co-operation between the two arms; governments must ensure compliance with judicial decisions and relationships must be cordial. Furthermore, those quasi-independent courts are not exempt from the need for reform, as shown with the cases of Malawi and Kenya.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P43">
      Advocates for judicial independence do stress holistic measures. One prominent measure is for judges to become social and political actors: agents of change rather than simply decision makers. Although judicialization of politics can see retaliatory interference and potential electoral violence, evidence shows that it is ultimately fruitful; and, if combined with the above recommendation, would limit avenues for interference. Thus, judges should be at the forefront of calls for independence and play an active role in the promotion of liberal ideals. This could include: regional judge associations to engender communication and comradeship
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.112215062020" ref-symbol="17" />
      ; greater interaction with stakeholders; giving lectures or writing articles to educate and raise awareness; and participating in the training of incoming court officials. In addition, judicial budgets need to be sufficient and free from manipulation. Lifting judge salaries would remove the need for corruption, and an increase in resources would improve the overall effectiveness of case processing.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P44">
      With regards to police reform, sufficient budgets are arguably the priority. Poor salaries are continuously found to be cause for police corruption and for low police morale. The latter is also affected by a general lack of resources available to police when fighting crime: stations go without adequate personnel, vehicles, computers and investigative equipment. As shown, this can perpetuate inequalities when the meagre resources held are delegated to elites or `the highest bidder’. Furthermore, a lack of conventional means is often what translates into police brutality. As such, the Nigerian #EndSARS movement includes calls to improve police welfare. However, addressing underlying police culture cannot be dismissed, particularly when it comes to those that are militarized. The police need to be seen as a service to the community, not a force against it, and this is particularly important when it comes to the reminiscence of historical injustices
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.112315062020" ref-symbol="18" />
      .
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P45">Improving community-police relations more generally is an important aspect of police reform. This involves breaking down misconceptions on either side to allow mutual understanding. Methods include: involvement of the community in policing; police participation in community events, of which sport has proved a successful example; police officers being representative of the communities in which they work; education in the community; and enhanced training for police officers. Training should involve curriculums on human rights and conflict resolution, as well as on local contexts when representation is difficult. Many problems have arisen in Nigeria where officers from the federally structured police force do not know the culture, language or terrain in which they operate. </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P46">
      Additionally, effective oversight mechanisms are essential to ensure that police are not held above the law. While many sub-Saharan African nations do have police oversight mechanisms, these too require reform. They must be independent; current mechanisms tend to consist of former police officers or others with links to the polity. Whether or not this affects their decisions is irrelevant, as perceived independence can be just as important as genuine independence. Resources are again a factor. For instance, the Kenyan Independent Police Oversight Authority only finalized four cases within its first six years of operation due to meagre resources. Improving this is imperative to swift yet effective decision making. Current mechanisms are also often delegating investigative capacities to police as they do not have the resources
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.112415062020" ref-symbol="19" />
      , nor mandate, to do so themselves. On a similar note, mandates should be extended to allow oversight mechanisms to assume disciplinary measures and implement recommendations.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P47">By reforming the judiciary and police as independent and effective institutions, the law would become more accessible. As noted, citizens frequently do not employ the courts or police as they believe they would not/could not help them. The state must prioritize resources to bring these services up to standard. Enhancing internet access—through the investment in infrastructure and provision of affordable services—would assist. Not only would this ameliorate access to information, but it would also allow streamlined administration of justice. For instance, it could facilitate digital hearings to address COVID-19 induced court backlogs. In Rwanda public computers were introduced during the pandemic to ensure that persons belonging to disadvantaged groups had access, a commended initiative. Then there are other aspects of accessible law, such as functional Access to Information Acts and secure press freedom.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P48">Taking into account the atmosphere in many African nations, civil society has the greatest role to play in promoting these aspects, to urge government compliance and to educate the general population. Education on the law and on human rights would empower citizens to not only access justice but to hold their governments to account. Improving access to legal aid as per the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights’ Lilongwe Declaration would also safeguard access to the law. Certainly, to improve the rule of law it is important to consider various actors, whether it be international, regional or national institutions, governmental organs or independent mandated institutions, and civil society or ordinary citizens. This additionally involves consideration of traditional actors.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P49">
      Scholars and practitioners working on judicial reform, police reform, and overall rule of law in Africa argue for the inclusion of traditional justice mechanisms. This is particularly the case in post-conflict nations such as Sierra Leone and Liberia. By focusing solely on `conventional’ formal mechanisms, this is taking a Western-centric approach, and, moreover, fails to account for their colonial and post-colonial histories
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.112515062020" ref-symbol="20" />
      , alongside current on-the-ground realities including their ineffectiveness. Such research and ideas about the need to consider traditional justice does not completely exclude conventional means nor the need to implement aforementioned reforms, rather the point is that a hybrid approach would work best. This is important as traditional mechanisms themselves are not devoid of issues relating to political manipulation, lack of due process or violation of human rights.
    </p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P50">Those who argue for a hybrid approach appeal for a hierarchical system with traditional justice as a broad bottom tier. Reform therefore includes the expansion of traditional justice to all sectors of society which may not have readily available access to formal mechanisms. Although a main benefit of traditional justice is that it is already more accessible to rural populations, other benefits include: the low cost; a conversational nature, particularly beneficial for illiterate or semi-literate populations; a less daunting atmosphere; and cultural and social legitimacy. There also tends to be a focus on reconciliation and repatriation rather than punitive measures which can feed into inequalities. However, this is not always the case, and as such calls for hybridization emphasize restrictions on the types of cases which traditional mechanisms have jurisdiction over, and on the types of punishments they may apply. Thus, the hierarchical aspect allows formal mechanisms as higher tiers which can be accessed for more serious crimes and can act as appeal system for lower tier decisions. There is also an emphasis on the traditional as a voluntary tier.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P51">
      By this, it is still necessary to reform the judiciary and police, and to co-implement other measures to improve access to justice. It is also worth stating that those who advocate traditional justice typically incorporate vigilante groups. Here, the line is drawn between spontaneous and punitive mob lynchings, and organized vigilante groups who, despite being reputed for punitive actions, can provide efficient, non-punitive justice and security. For instance, several vigilante groups in Nigeria are known as more accessible means for such, and a focus has been put on transitioning them into accountable and regulated community policing groups. Traditional justice ties in to appeals for devolution to remove concentration of power from the executive; however, clear mandates and jurisdictions, alongside ample training and oversight is key to ensuring that failures of conventional rule of law are not simply perpetuated
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.40.112615062020" ref-symbol="21" />
      . 
    </p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.ESSAY.40.15958366791" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Conclusion</heading>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P52">The rule of law is a vital component of modern states. This essay has shown that despite some successes, the three aspects of formalist rule of law require much improvement across sub-Saharan Africa. These three aspects are inter-related. Judicial ineffectiveness, which is very much a case of executive interference, has created an atmosphere where government officials and other elites are granted impunity for their actions. Simultaneously, it creates a lack of procedural fairness for others, particularly those who pose a threat to the regime. There becomes no certainty or equality before the law. Police ineffectiveness sees similar consequences, and additionally allows disorder and insecurity to go unabated. Without effective judiciaries or effective police, the law becomes inaccessible for much of the population. This is compounded by a general lack of access to information, including insufficient press freedom and internet.</p>
          <p id="ASOS.RULE.OF.LAW.2023.P53">With the case examples within this essay, broader implications of rule of law failures become apparent. As a vital component of modern states, a lack of the rule of law negates the potential for democracy, development, human rights, and peace and security. Nevertheless, tangible measures can be taken to improve the situation across sub-Saharan Africa. Such measures should consider a multitude of actors across the international, regional, national and local spheres. In particular, traditional actors should not be discounted. It is vital that reform of any aspect, those being judicial effectiveness, police effectiveness, or accessible law, moves beyond Western-centric views of what the rule of law entails, and, moreover, addresses perceptions that African nations did not or would not have the rule of law without Western imposition.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Footnotes</heading>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.105115062020" ref-symbol="1">
      For instance, Freedom House’s 
      <i>Freedom Around the World</i>
       and The Fund for Peace’s Fragile States Index.
    </endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.105315062020" ref-symbol="2">Calculated by Olaniyan, K. in `Rule of Law? What Rule of Law?’ mg.co.za/article/2019-11-22-00-rule-of-law-what-rule-of-law, 22 November 2019. Accessed 16 June 2020.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.105415062020" ref-symbol="3">Human Rights Watch. `Ethiopia: Oromo Opposition Figures Held Despite Court Orders’. www.hrw.org/news/2023/07/24/ethiopia-oromo-opposition-figures-held-despite-court-orders, 24 July 2023. Accessed July 26 2023.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.105615062020" ref-symbol="4">
      As outlined by Freedom House 
      <i>Freedom Around the World 2023</i>
      .
    </endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.111315062020" ref-symbol="5">See The Independent. `Museveni Questions Need for Judicial Independence’. www.independent.co.ug/museveni-questions-need-for-judicial-independence, September 22 2022. Accessed July 25 2023.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.111515062020" ref-symbol="6">See, for instance, Spencer, L. `Executive Control Through Judicial Appointments in Turkey and Cameroon’. www.iacl-democracy-2020.org/blog/2016/3/23/blog-post-sample-9wntn-6ye75-hwawc-xx9lz-p6k2z, 16 November 2020. Accessed 20 June 2021.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.171801082022" ref-symbol="7">As for interference into other judiciaries, see VonDoepp and Ellett for suggested reasons.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.111615062020" ref-symbol="8">
      Calculated by Zounmenou, D. in `Third Terms for Presidents of Cote d’Ivoire and Guinea must be Stopped’. issafrica.org/iss-today/third-terms-for-presidents-of-cote-divoire-and-guinea-must-be-stopped, 30 September 2020. Accessed 30 June 2022. 
      
      Note that the author has added those which have occurred since.
    </endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.111715062020" ref-symbol="9">See Kimani, M. (2009). `Security for the Highest Bidder’. Africa Renewal and The Editors. (2016). `Patronage and Ethnic Divisions Hobble Sierra Leone’s Political Parties’. World Politics Review.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.111815062020" ref-symbol="10">Democratic Alliance. `Track the Consequences of Zondo’s State Capture Reports’. www.da.org.za/statecaptureconsequences. Accessed July 31 2023</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.1694700757" ref-symbol="11">See Missing Voices (missingvoices.or.ke) for a comprehensive breakdown.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.1694700901" ref-symbol="12">Obermeier, Anna Marie, and Rustad, Siri Aas. `Conflict Trends: A Global Overview, 1946–2022’ PRIO Paper. www.prio.org/publications/13513, 2023. Accessed August 1 2023.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.1694701048" ref-symbol="13">Human Rights Watch. `Ethiopia: Ethnic Cleansing Persists Under Tigray Truce’. www.hrw.org/news/2023/06/01/ethiopia-ethnic-cleansing-persists-under-tigray-truce, June 1 2023. Accessed June 28 2023.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.1694701120" ref-symbol="14">These attacks on press freedom are tracked by Reporters Without Borders.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.1694701219" ref-symbol="15">The African Freedom of Expression Exchange provides a list of countries with access to information laws.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.1694700774" ref-symbol="16">Access Now. `Weapons of Control, Shields of Impunity’. www.accessnow.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/2022-KIO-Report-final.pdf 2022. Accessed August 1.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.112215062020" ref-symbol="17">This can include Associations for specific agendas, such as the International Association of Women Judges who work on gendered issues.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.112315062020" ref-symbol="18">South Africa had some success in rebranding the Police Force as the Police Service post-Apartheid. For a breakdown of what demilitarization should look like, see the work by Peter Kraska.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.112415062020" ref-symbol="19">For a comprehensive overview of the issues with Kenyan investigations, see Spencer, L. `Obtaining Justice for Extrajudicial Killings in Kenya’. democracyinafrica.org/obtaining-justice-extrajudicial-killings-kenya, 14 November 2018. Accessed 16 June 2020.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.112515062020" ref-symbol="20">However, it has been argued that some forms of `traditional justice’ were also perpetuated or assimilated by colonialism.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.40.112615062020" ref-symbol="21">Of particular concern is traditional actors perpetuating gender, class, ethnic or religious based divisions.</endnote>
     </gen-section>
     <bibl-section id="ASS.ESSAY.40.113315062020" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="BIBL-REF" usage="">
          <heading>Bibliography</heading>
          <bibl-list>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">Access Now `Weapons of Control, Shields of Impunity’ www.accessnow.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/2022-KIO-Report-final.pdf 2022. Accessed August 1.</bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Baker, B. `Who do People Turn to for Policing in Sierra Leone?’, in 
        <i>Journal of Contemporary African Studies</i>
        , 23(3), pp. 371–390, 2005.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
        `Beyond the Tarmac Road: Local Forms of Policing in Sierra Leone &amp; Rwanda’, in 
        <i>Review of African Political Economy</i>
        , 118, pp. 555–570, 2008.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Bayley, D. `Law Enforcement and the Rule of Law: Is there a Tradeoff?’, in 
        <i>Criminology and Public Policy</i>
        , 2(1), pp. 133–154, 2002.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Buchard, S., and Simati, M. `The Role of the Courts in Mitigating Election Violence in Nigeria’, in 
        <i>Cadernos de Estudos Africanos</i>
        , 38, pp. 123–144, 2019.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">Center for Advancement of Rights and Democracy. `The Digital Divide’. www.cardeth.org/digital-divide/, 16 May 2022. Accessed 6 June 2022.</bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Dicey, A. V. 
        <i>Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution. </i>
         (8th Edn). London, Macmillan, 1915.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Freedom House. 
        <i>Freedom Around the World 2023</i>
        .
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Haruna, B. A., and A. M. Yusuf. `A Conceptual Analysis of the Rule of Law in Nigeria’, in 
        <i>Bayero Journal of International Law &amp; Jurisprudence</i>
        , 1(1), pp. 101–127, 2016.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Iloh, E. C., and Nwokedi, M. E. `Non-State Actors and Internal Security Management in Nigeria: The Case of Vigilante Groups’, in Oshita, O., Alumona, I. M., and Onuoha, F. C. (Eds). 
        <i>Internal Security Management in Nigeria.</i>
         Singapore, Palgrave Macmillan, 2019.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">International Crisis Group. `Watchmen of Lake Chad: Vigilante Groups Fighting Boko Haram’. www.crisisgroup.org/africa/west-africa/nigeria/244-watchmen-lake-chad-vigilante-groups-fighting-boko-haram, 23 February 2017. Accessed 16 June 2020.</bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance. 
        <i>Challenges to the Rule of Law in Africa: Workshop Report.</i>
         Pretoria, 2016. 
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Kamga, G. E. K. `The Political (In)Dependence of the Judiciary in Cameroon: Fact or Fiction?’, in 
        <i>Africa Review</i>
         11(1), pp. 46–62, 2019.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">Kantor, A, and Persson, M. `Understanding Vigilantism: Informal Security Providers and Security Sector Reform in Liberia.’ fba.se/contentassets/59ce4a18f4db4484ad1a4b8bcd1cbaf0/understanding-vigilantism-ssr-liberia-2.pdf. Accessed 16 June 2020.</bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Kposowa, A. `Erosion of the Rule of Law as a Contributing Factor in Civil Conflict: The Case of Sierra Leone’, in 
        <i>Police Practice and Research</i>
        , 7(1), pp 35–48, 2006.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Laslett, P. (Ed.) 
        <i>Locke: Two Treatises of Government.</i>
         Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1988.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        LexisNexis. 
        <i>Advancing the Rule of Law in Africa 2022.</i>
               </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">Logan, C. 2017. `PP39: Ambitious SDG Goal Confronts Challenging Realities: Access to Justice is Still Elusive for Many Africans’. afrobarometer.org/publications/pp39-access-to-justice-in-africa, 13 March 2017. Accessed 16 June 2020.</bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Marais, E. `The Police-Community Relationship’, in Glanz, L. (Ed.) 
        <i>Managing Crime in the New South Africa: Selected Readings </i>
        , pp. 113–136. Pretoria, HSRC Publishers. 1993.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Martin, J. 2012. `Vigilantism and State Crime in South Africa’, in 
        <i>State Crime</i>
        , 1(2), pp. 217–234, 2012.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Masengu, T. `The Vulnerability of Judges in Contemporary Africa: Alarming Trends’, in 
        <i>Africa Today</i>
        , 63(4), pp. 3–19, 2017.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Maunga, M., Mugari, I., and Tundu, M. `Perspectives on Vigilantism in the Republic of Zimbabwe’, in 
        <i>Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences</i>
        , 6(5), pp. 323–334, 2015.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Cohler, A., Miller, C., and Stone, H. (Eds). 
        <i>Montesquieu: The Spirit of Laws.</i>
         Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1989.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Mutua, M. 2016. `Africa and the Rule of Law’, in 
        <i>Sur International Journal on Human Rights</i>
        , 13(23), pp. 159–173, 2016.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">O’Regan, C. `Towards a Safer Khayelitsha’. www.khayelitshacommission.org.za/images/towards_khaye_docs/Khayelitsha_Commission_Report_WEB_FULL_TEXT_C.pdf, August 2014. Accessed 16 June 2020.</bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Obarrio, J. `Traditional Justice as Rule of Law in Africa’, in Sriram, C. L., Martin-Ortega, O. and Herman, J. (Eds). 
        <i>Peacebuilding and Rule of Law in Africa: Just Peace?</i>
        . Routledge, Abingdon, 2011.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">Pring, C., and Vrushi, J. `Global Corruption Barometer—Africa 2019: Citizens’ views and experiences of corruption’. www.afrobarometer.org/publications/global-corruption-barometer-africa-2019-citizens-views-and-experiences-corruption, 12 July 2019. Accessed 16 June 2020.</bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Shomade, S. 
        <i>Colonial Legacies and the Rule of Law in Africa </i>
        . Routledge, Abingdon, 2022.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Simati, M. 
        <i>Post-Election Violence in Africa: The Impact of Judicial Independence</i>
        . Routledge, Abingdon, 2020.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Sriram, C. L. `(Re)Building the Rule of Law in Sierra Leone’, in Sriram, C. L., Martin-Ortega, O. and Herman, J. (Eds). 
        <i>Peacebuilding and Rule of Law in Africa: Just Peace?</i>
         Routledge, Abingdon, 2011.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Stewart, C. `The Rule of Law and the Tinkerbell Effect: Theoretical Considerations, Criticisms and Justifications for the Rule of Law’, in 
        <i>Macquarie Law Journal</i>
        , 4, pp. 135–164, 2004.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Super, G. `Volatile Sovereignty: Governing Crime through the Community in Khayelitsha’, in 
        <i>Law &amp; Society Review</i>
        , 50(2), pp. 450–483, 2016.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">United Nations Human Rights Council. `The Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic: Impact and Challenges for Independent Justice’. independence-judges-lawyers.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/A_HRC_47_35_English.pdf, June 2021. Accessed 29 June 2022.</bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        VonDoepp, P, and Ellett, R. `Reworking Strategic Models of Executive-Judicial Relations: Insights from New African Democracies’, in 
        <i>Comparative Politics</i>
        , 43(2), pp. 147–165, 2011.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">Wambua, P. 2015. `AD57: Call the police? Across Africa, citizens point to police and government performance issues on crime’. afrobarometer.org/publications/ad57-call-police-across-africa-citizens-point-police-and-government-performance-issues, 9 November 2015. Accessed 16 June 2020.</bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">World Justice Project. Rule of Law Index 2022.</bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">Zondo, R. Judicial Commission of Inquiry into State Capture. www.gov.za/sites/default/files/gcis_document/202206/electronic-state-capture-commission-report-part-v-vol-i.pdf, June 2022. Accessed 3 July 2022.</bibl-entry>
          </bibl-list>
     </bibl-section>
</essay>