<?xml version="1.0"?>
<essay id="ASS.ESSAY.8" id-root="ass.essay.8" iso="" region="ASS" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ESSAY-REF" usage="ass" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
     <heading>State Failure in Africa: Causes, Consequences and Responses</heading>
     <alt-heading type="SECTION-LONG-UPPERCASE" usage="ass">General Survey</alt-heading>
     <alt-heading type="COUNTRY-SHORT-TITLECASE" usage="ass">State Failure in Africa</alt-heading>
     <author-group>
          <primary-authors>
               <person-name>
                    <forename>Paul D.</forename>
                    <surname>Williams</surname>
               </person-name>
          </primary-authors>
     </author-group>
     <p>This essay addresses the following four questions: What is meant by state failure? What causes states to fail? What is the scope of this phenomenon in contemporary Africa, and how have insiders and outsiders responded to this process?</p>
     <p>Different people find these questions important for different reasons. For the citizens whose states fail, the impacts upon their daily lives are rarely uniform: they can range from immense to negligible depending on a wide range of factors, including how much control the state previously exerted over its citizens, or how far the inhabitants happened to live from the capital city and other major urban centres. For Western governments, on the other hand, state failure in Africa is commonly viewed as both a moral catastrophe and, especially after the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington, DC, USA, of 11 September 2001, a security threat. These dual concerns were neatly elucidated by the then British Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, Jack Straw, in September 2002. When confronted with state failure, Straw suggested that `we cannot but be concerned at the implications for the human rights and freedoms of those who are forced to live in such anarchic and chaotic conditions. Yet, the events of 11 September 2001 devastatingly illustrated a more particular and direct reason for our concern, for it dramatically showed how a state’s disintegration can impact on the lives of people many thousands of miles away, even at the heart of the most powerful democracy in the world. In these circumstances, turning a blind eye to the break-down of order in any part of the world, however distant, invites direct threats to our national security and wellbeing. I believe therefore that preventing states from failing and resuscitating those that fail is one of the strategic imperatives of our times.’</p>
     <p>After 11 September 2001 the US Government stated that it was `now threatened less by conquering states than&#160;…&#160;by failing ones’. Africa was widely viewed as a particular cause for concern, since the continent was the part of the world where state failure is most widespread and deeply entrenched. As a result, the US National Security Strategy (NSS) published in March 2006 acknowledged that `our security depends upon partnering with Africans to strengthen fragile and failing states and bring ungoverned areas under the control of effective democracies’. Although the May 2010 US NSS had downgraded the issue compared with threats related to potentially hostile states armed with weapons of mass destruction, it still noted that `failing states breed conflict and endanger regional and global security’. The 2015 US NSS included in its list of `top strategic risks’ to US interests: `significant security consequences associated with weak or failing states (including mass atrocities, regional spillover, and transnational organized crime)’, while the 2017 US NSS cautioned that `failing states can destabilize entire regions’ and that the USA would assist governments in these territories to `prevent threats to the U.S. homeland’. State failure is thus a serious concern for both insiders and outsiders, and it is on Africa that the international spotlight has most commonly fallen.</p>
     <p>
    The prominence of such discourses about state failure has also generated a great deal of controversy. Stewart Patrick, for instance, has argued that `while failed states may be worthy of America’s attention on humanitarian and development grounds, most of them are irrelevant to US national security. The risks they pose are mainly to their own inhabitants. Sweeping claims to the contrary are not only inaccurate but distracting and unhelpful, providing little guidance to policy makers seeking to prioritize scarce attention and resources.’ In another line of critique, Charles Call suggested that the term `failed state’ should be abandoned because of several serious deficiencies: its tendency to aggregate diverse states and their problems; the related tendency to encourage generic prescriptions for successful states; the unfortunate tendency to distract attention from more fundamental questions about democracy and the nature of specific regimes; the tendency to conflate peacefulness with a process of state building; the tendency to obfuscate the West’s role in the contemporary condition of these states; and the patronizing assumption that Westerners know what a state is and should be. The latter point in particular has attracted supporters in the post-colonial studies literature who note that terms such as `failed states’, `weak states’ and `quasi-states’ are based on ethnocentric assumptions that depict African states as imperfect copies of Western European and North American states and judge them according to external standards in order `to promote and justify their political and economic domination by Western states and other international actors’
    <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.8.0207081208" ref-symbol="1" />
    . This essay is not intended to refute such critics, for they have raised many sensible questions about the dangers of using general terms like `failure’, `fragility’ and `weakness’ without due regard for the variation across the world’s states. Rather, this essay provides an overview of the dominant discourses on state failure in Africa and attempts to understand what responses, from both insiders and outsiders, they have helped facilitate.
  </p>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>What is State Failure?</heading>
          <p>
      Discussions of state failure are essentially about the inter-relationships between patterns of authority, political control and institution-building. Put another way, analysing state failure in Africa requires a keen sense of the shifting configurations of power on the continent and beyond. In most of the literature on the subject, the idea of `failure’ is invoked in two main senses, referred to in this essay as the failure to control and the failure to promote human flourishing
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.8.0207081209" ref-symbol="2" />
      .
    </p>
          <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
               <heading>The Failure to Control</heading>
               <p>In the first sense, failure is understood in terms of the inability of state institutions to control actors and processes within a given territory. Robert I. Rotberg maintains that `failed states cannot control their peripheral regions, especially those regions occupied by out-groups&#160;…&#160;Plausibly, the extent of a state’s failure can be measured by the extent of its geographical expanse genuinely controlled (especially after dark) by the official government’. It is important to remember, however, that control and failure should not be seen as absolutes. A `failed’ state in this sense of the term might successfully control some of its territory but not all of it. Sudan, for example, is commonly classified as a failed state, yet it continues to exert effective control over large portions of its territory, even after the secession of South Sudan in 2011, and can wreak havoc and terror on some of those individuals and groups who contest its authority in those areas. In contrast, between 2006 and mid-2011 the Transitional Federal Government in Somalia could not even control its capital city. The new Federal Government established in late 2012 continues to struggle on this issue.</p>
               <p>This suggests that viewing the phenomenon of state failure in absolute terms and through solely statist lenses is not always particularly helpful. Rather, analysts need to appreciate the degrees of success and failure that can exist within a single state and recognize that so-called `failed states’ are usually made up of numerous (and often interconnected) zones where different sources of authority may dominate the local governance structures. In any given zone, the authority in question may vary. Indeed, as Rotberg noted, it may differ considerably within the same zone depending on the time of day or night. The authority structure could be an organ of the state’s official government, but it may also be, among other things, an insurgency or guerrilla movement, a clan, a militia, an extended family, a spiritual leader, an international peace operation, or even a transnational corporation or a non-governmental organization.</p>
               <p>
        To give one example, the collapse of the Somali central Government in 1991 did not automatically exclude the possibility that zones of alternative forms of governance and authority existed within Somalia’s officially recognized international borders. As Kenneth Menkhaus observed, since 1991 `Somalia has repeatedly shown that in some places and at some times communities, towns, and regions can enjoy relatively high levels of peace, reconciliation, security and lawfulness despite the absence of central authority.’ These authority structures have come in various shapes and sizes. They have included local polities comprised of coalitions of businessmen, clan elders and Muslim clergy involved in administering financial services and 
        <i>Shari`a</i>
         courts, and larger-scale structures such as the administrative centres of the `Republic of Somaliland’ (1991–), `Puntland’ (1998–), the Rahanwin Resistance Army’s administration of Bay and Bakool regions (1998–2002), and the Banaadir Regional Authority (1996). Even when Somalia’s central government was officially resurrected in late 2012, it had to negotiate deals with a variety of these regional entities as well as new ones that emerged subsequently. By mid-2017 four Interim Regional Administrations had emerged across south-central Somalia: the Interim Jubbaland Administration (2013), the Interim South West Administration (2014), the Interim Galmudug Administration (2015), and the Interim Hiraan and Middle Shabelle Administration (2016).). A present difficult negotiations over power-sharing continue between the Federal Government and what are now known as Somalia’s Federal Member States
      </p>
               <p>
        When analysing state failure in Africa as a failure to control, analysts and practitioners would thus do well to reject a state-centric ontology in favour of a neo-Gramscian frame of reference, wherein the world is not simply seen as being made up of clashing states in an anarchic international system but, instead, is constituted by the complex inter-relationships between states, social forces and ideas within specific world orders
        <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.8.0207081210" ref-symbol="3" />
        . Adopting this ontology is far more useful for analysing state failure, because, as Timothy Raeymaekers correctly observed, what we are witnessing in several cases of so-called `state failure’ is actually better understood as `neopatrimonialism without the state’. That is, systems of patron-client relations that may or may not be linked to the official institutions of state power. Arguably, the closest Western officialdom has come to adopting such a perspective is the US Government’s anxiety about what it terms `ungoverned spaces’, `defined as geographic areas where governments do not exercise effective control’
        <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.8.0207081211" ref-symbol="4" />
        . Unfortunately, this misses the crucial point that just because official governments do not control these areas it does not necessarily mean that they are completely lacking other structures of governance.
      </p>
          </gen-section>
          <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
               <heading>The Failure to Promote Human Flourishing</heading>
               <p>Failure is also commonly used in a second sense to highlight the ways in which states fail to provide public goods to their entire population rather than favouring one or other particular segment of it. The idea that states have a responsibility to provide their citizens with certain basic rights has long been an issue of debate within international relations, dating back at least as far as notions of popular sovereignty articulated by Jean Bodin in the 16th century. Since the publication in 2001 of a report by the International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty, this line of argument is now commonly discussed under the heading of the `responsibility to protect’ after the title of the Commission’s report.</p>
               <p>Although many African governments have jealously guarded traditional ideas about sovereignty and non-intervention, the responsibility to protect notion has made significant headway on the continent in recent years, and with it has come a plethora of literature speaking of `failure’ in these terms. In July 2000, for instance, the Constitutive Act of the new African Union (AU) included several clauses suggesting that sovereign states had a variety of obligations and responsibilities to their citizens. Moreover, Article 4(h) stated that one of the Union’s principles was that it had the right `to intervene in a Member State pursuant to a decision of the Assembly in respect of grave circumstances, namely war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity’. Such obligations were confirmed in September 2005, when African states, along with the rest of the United Nations (UN) General Assembly, formally accepted the responsibility to protect principle. The AU has invoked Article 4(h) on only two occasions: in 2006, to support the trial of former Chadian President Hissène Habré, and in December 2015, as an act of coercive diplomacy to persuade Burundi to accept an AU peace operation.</p>
               <p>As defined in the World Summit Outcome document: `each individual State has the responsibility to protect its populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. This responsibility entails the prevention of such crimes, including their incitement, through appropriate and necessary means. We accept that responsibility and will act in accordance with it.’ In subsequent years the UN Secretariat has defined the responsibility to protect as resting on three pillars. The first is the responsibility of each&#160;state to use appropriate and necessary means to protect its own population from genocide, war crimes,&#160;ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, as well as from their incitement. The second pillar refers to the commitment&#160;that UN member states will help each other exercise this responsibility. This includes specific commitments to help states build the capacity to protect their populations from the four crimes and to assist those that are under stress before crises and conflicts erupt. The third pillar refers to international society’s collective responsibility to respond through the UN in a timely and decisive manner, using Chapters VI, VII and VIII&#160;of the UN Charter as appropriate, when national authorities are manifestly failing to protect their populations from the four crimes listed above.</p>
               <p>Understood in these two senses, state failure on the African continent is a widespread phenomenon. It is important to note, however, that both these views of failure are based upon a particular conception of statehood: what Rotberg calls `the fundamental tasks of a nation-state in the modern world’ and what William Zartman refers to as `the basic functions of the state’. The particular idea of statehood that dominates discussions about state failure was born in Europe and is usually associated with the Treaties of Westphalia in 1648. That year is thus commonly understood within mainstream international relations theory as representing the birth of modern interstate relations. Yet, while this specific date of origin makes for neat theory, it rests upon a dubious and mythical history. As Benno Teschke has argued, even in its European birthplace, the practice of Westphalian statehood as opposed to the ideal of Westphalian statehood did not emerge until well after 1648. Specifically, Teschke has shown how modern international relations based on the Westphalian ideal of statehood only began with the conjunction of the rise of capitalism and modern state formation in England. Thereafter, the English model influenced the restructuring of the old regimes of the European continent, a process that was incremental and highly uneven and was not completed until the First World War.</p>
               <p>The relevant point for this discussion is that the nature of statehood itself is contested rather than obviously apparent. Specifically, as Christopher Clapham has argued, the Westphalian ideal rests on `unsure foundations’, not least because in some parts of the world `the essential conditions for statehood cannot plausibly be met’. The `fundamental tasks’ of statehood envisaged in this Westphalian ideal revolved around the provision of security, welfare and representation. In particular, the defining characteristic of the Westphalian ideal of statehood has been the right of states to exercise five monopoly powers:</p>
               <gen-list>
                    <item>the right to monopolize control of the instruments of violence;</item>
                    <item>the sole right to tax citizens;</item>
                    <item>the prerogative of ordering the political allegiances of citizens and of enlisting their support in war;</item>
                    <item>the sovereign right to adjudicate in disputes between citizens;</item>
                    <item>the exclusive right of representation in international society, which has been linked with the authority to bind the whole community in international law.</item>
               </gen-list>
               <p>
        Even in Europe, as Teschke observed, the practical acquisition of these monopoly powers sometimes took centuries of often violent turmoil and social upheaval. Compared with Europe and viewed from the perspective of the 
        <i>longue durée</i>
        , it is clear that most states in Africa are still mired in the relatively early stages of state formation. Consequently, it should come as little surprise that the practical acquisition of these monopolies has been uneven across the continent.
      </p>
               <p>Although it has been similarly traumatic and drawn out, the process of state building has unfolded differently in Africa than it did in Europe. Unlike in Europe, where state borders were demarcated with reference to their neighbours, in Africa state power tended to radiate from a focal core (usually the capital city) that only rarely came into direct confrontation with its neighbouring governments. As a basic rule of thumb, the further one travelled from this core, the weaker the state’s control became. This fact rendered the state borders drawn up by the European colonial powers in Berlin, Germany, in 1884–85 relatively meaningless, or at least highly porous, for many practical aspects of the local inhabitants’ daily existence, including commerce or communicating with individuals who were officially `foreigners’, but who belonged to the same ethnic or tribal groups.</p>
               <p>
        Understood in these terms, the issue of `failed states’ in Africa is largely about the extent to which the Westphalian ideal of statehood has taken root in the rather different, and in many ways inhospitable, conditions found on the continent. As the Organization of African Unity’s (OAU, now the AU) charter made abundantly clear, the ideal of Westphalian statehood clearly attracted many advocates among Africa’s first generation of post-colonial 
        
        elites. It was also helped by the willingness of the great powers within international society to grant these states international recognition. The practical realization of this ideal, however, has been far more contested and uneven. As a result, from the outside, African states often looked like the Westphalian ideal, in that they were recognized members of international society and their representatives sat on the councils of various international organizations. On the inside, however, these governments were often considered illegitimate by much of the local population and wielded the institutions of state to subdue political opponents and benefit their supporters. These were, in Robert Jackson’s famous phrase, `quasi-states’: legal fictions that rarely commanded much in the way of national loyalty or the power to control developments throughout their designated territory.
      </p>
               <p>What this means for an analysis of state failure is simply that, depending on the local conditions, `failure’ is far more likely in certain parts of the continent than others. More specifically, as Clapham has argued, `those areas of Africa that maintained reasonably settled and effective state structures during the period prior to colonialism are proving best able to do so as the institutional legacies of colonialism fade’. Where these structures were weak, other forms of authority (familial, spiritual, ethnic, etc.) have filled the vacuum.</p>
          </gen-section>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.ESSAY.8.14727191351" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>What Causes States to Fail?</heading>
          <p>There is no simple or single formula for understanding the causes of state failure in Africa. Nevertheless, the available literature on the subject often makes at least two relevant general distinctions. The first distinction is between states that fail because of a lack of relevant capacities and those that fail to promote the interests of all their inhabitants through political choice, often with the intention of benefiting the incumbent regime and its supporters at the expense of another group within the state. President Robert Mugabe’s manipulation of the Zimbabwe African National Union—Patriotic Front (ZANU—PF) and state power in Zimbabwe is a paradigmatic example of a regime choosing to deny basic rights to certain segments of its population in an attempt to bolster regime security. The same could be said for President Issaias Afewerki’s policies in Eritrea or President Paul Biya’s policies in Cameroon. However, the dynamics in these cases are different from instances where a regime may well want to restore order to part of its territory but lacks the relevant capacities to do so. These dynamics were apparent in, for instance, the Ugandan Government’s longstanding inability to defeat rather than displace the Lord’s Resistance Army, the Somali Federal Government’s efforts to defeat al-Shabaab, Nigeria’s failure to stem Boko Haram’s insurgency and, most recently, Mozambique’s struggle to stop the spread of Islamic State-inspired insurgents. Such incapacity may sometimes lead to political compromises, such as the decision made by the Sudanese authorities to allow the south of the country to secede in 2011. At other times, the result is simply longstanding stalemates and the de facto partition of a state’s territory. Outside of the military sphere, a government might wish to enhance the development prospects of its citizens, or stem the tide of a deadly virus, such as Ebola, but lack the necessary resources and instruments.</p>
          <p>A second distinction points to the differences between structural and contingent causes of state failure. In the structural category, four main arguments are commonly advanced. First, as noted above, the Westphalian ideal of statehood has not successfully taken root across all of Africa because local conditions were inhospitable to state building and exerting high levels of state control over local societies. Although international society helped the process by granting recognition to Africa’s newly independent states, it could not ensure that their inhabitants invested a great deal of faith in, or commitment to, them. Not long after independence, however, Cold War politics meant that the superpowers often made genuinely national nation-building even more difficult by stoking the fires of dissent within many African states in the name of either communism or capitalism.</p>
          <p>A second structural argument has revolved around the challenges posed by political geography, especially resources and environmental factors. In this case, the point is that some African states that were creations of the European colonial powers were not endowed with a physical environment conducive to administering an effective state. In particular, states such as those in the West African savannah suffered from extremely low densities of people, which made administration and social control both costly and difficult. The same was true for much of Africa since large areas of it have ecologies that cannot easily support high densities of population, not least because over 50% of the continent suffers from inadequate rainfall that makes inhospitable environments for both human settlement and agriculture. Indeed, it is arguably only the Great Lakes region, the Ethiopian highlands and parts of Nigeria that have sustained relatively high densities of people.</p>
          <p>A third structural argument has applied the concept of the security dilemma to explain how fear of an ungoverned future can propel the actors within states to hasten the collapse of central government once public order begins to erode and a situation of domestic anarchy seems likely to emerge. Here, the suggestion is that the Hobbesian fear that lies at the heart of the security dilemma explains why groups begin to think that their potential rivals will not be restrained by state authority once the institutions of state have started to disintegrate. Analytically speaking, the crucial focus becomes understanding the `tipping point’ beyond which actors start to behave as if domestic anarchy exists, even if that is not entirely the case. At that stage, the dynamics of the domestic security dilemma may ensure that their conviction that state collapse and anarchy is imminent becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.</p>
          <p>
      A fourth argument has suggested that when it comes to state success in Africa `bigger isn’t better’. Specifically, in 2006 the authors of 
      <i>Big African States</i>
       concluded that most of Africa’s large states have exhibited `varying degrees of dysfunctionality&#160;…&#160;and, excluding to a degree South Africa, a sustained period of civil unrest, economic decline, state atrophy and social corrosion’
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.8.1315020708" ref-symbol="5" />
      . In a series of case studies, the authors suggested that in Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), Ethiopia, Nigeria and Sudan (all of which are in the top five African states in terms of population or landmass, or both) `the actual size of these states is itself a problem for governance’ and that, rather than being natural leaders, they `are actually problems for their associated regions’. It remains to be seen what will be the impact on these dynamics of the secession of the Republic of South Sudan in July 2011, but the news so far is not encouraging. In particular, the political wrangling within the Government that descended into civil war in December 2013 suggest that the country’s leaders and its current political system will be a regional problem for the foreseeable future.
    </p>
          <p>The contingent causes of state failure in Africa are even more numerous with five main factors commonly cited within the literature. Crudely summarized, these refer to the influence of bad leaders, predatory actors such as warlords and so-called `spoilers’, bad economic policies, bad environments, and bad neighbours.</p>
          <p>First, much of the blame for state failure has been heaped upon Africa’s leaders, not least Maj.-Gen. Mohammed Siad Barre (Somalia), Dr Siaka Stevens (Sierra Leone), Mobutu Sese Seko (Zaire/the DRC), Gen. Samuel Doe and later Charles Taylor (Liberia), Robert Mugabe (Zimbabwe) and Field Marshall Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir (Sudan). More recently, Issaias Afewerki (Eritrea), Laurent Gbagbo (Côte d’Ivoire), Salva Kiir Mayardit (South Sudan) and Paul Biya (Cameroon) might be added to the list. In many African states, such leaders and their political elites have been criticized for pursuing patrimonial politics that seek to use external sources of aid and finance to reward their supporters and weaken their opponents rather than pursuing genuinely national development strategies. Second, warlords and other `spoilers’ have been blamed for inflaming ethnic tensions and hastening state failure. The motivations of these predatory actors vary from case to case, but a common claim is that they have pursued violent strategies in order to accumulate wealth through the control of formal and/or informal markets. In this view, weak or failing state institutions provide an environment from which such warlords and `spoilers’ can profit.</p>
          <p>The third set of contingent factors concerns the political economy of state failure, especially the adoption by governments of `bad’ macroeconomic policies resulting in fiscal deficits and balance of payments crises, and the paradoxical effects of structural adjustment policies encouraged by a variety of international donors. As Nicolas van de Walle argued, both of these factors encouraged a `hollowing out’ of the state, which, in turn, increased `the chances that minor political incidents and disputes could cause the descent into failure’. Such political economies did not, however, automatically produce failed states. Hence, although Zaire/the DRC and Sierra Leone were both `hollowed out’ before failing, states such as Malawi and Niger were also weakened by economic failure but did not suffer a similar fate.</p>
          <p>A fourth commonly cited factor relates to the proliferation and availability of armaments, especially small arms and light weapons, in many of Africa’s weak and fragile states. An environment awash with arms makes it difficult for governments to control all of their territory or protect all of their citizens because, as Michael Klare suggested, `anti-government formations can readily assemble sufficient weaponry to mount a revolution or insurgency’. The flood of armaments out of Libya in 2011, for instance, added to the arsenals of rebel groups across Algeria, Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger, Sudan and elsewhere.</p>
          <p>A fifth contingent cause of state failure concerns the role played by actors within neighbouring states. These have tended to be either incumbent governments hostile to their neighbouring regimes (e.g., Taylor’s destabilization of Sierra Leone throughout the 1990s), or insurgent groups that destabilize their target state with or without support from the government of their (temporary) host state (e.g., the Rwandan Patriotic Front’s use of Uganda as a base for its operations before it invaded Rwanda in 1990, or Hutu genocidaires using eastern Zaire/the DRC to destabilize Paul Kagame’s regime in Rwanda after the 1994 genocide, and more recently al-Shabaab’s attempts to destabilize north-eastern Kenya). The collapse of the Libyan Government in late 2011 and the subsequent flow of arms and fighters across the wider region provides another illustration of how events in the neighbourhood can exacerbate existing conflicts, most notably in this case those in Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso, and Algeria.</p>
          <p>All of these factors can play a role in state failure, but the current state of knowledge remains far too vague accurately to predict the tipping points in particular cases.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>What is the Scope of the Problem?</heading>
          <p>
      As noted above, failed states raise challenges both for the great powers concerned about what threats might come out of them and for the locals who have to endure life inside them. Indeed, it has been suggested that since `the end of the Cold War, weak and failing states have arguably become the single-most important problem for international order’
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.8.0207081212" ref-symbol="6" />
      . Although state failure is not confined to Africa, the problem is arguably more widespread, deeply rooted and pressing here than in any other continent.
    </p>
          <p>Failed states can spawn a variety of transnational security problems with terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, crime, disease, energy insecurity, and regional instability chief among them. Not all of them, however, are equally prevalent in Africa’s cases. Africa does not have a problem with weapons of mass destruction proliferation, for example. In addition, transnational terrorism was relatively rare in sub-Saharan Africa, although it has grown into a major problem over the last decade. Similarly, small arms and light weapons proliferation, transnational crime (especially the illicit trade in drugs, arms, minerals, petroleum, timber, wildlife and human beings), infectious diseases (including HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, hepatitis B, Ebola, measles, the West Nile virus and now COVID-19), and political instability in the Horn of Africa and the Gulf of Guinea oil states do pose significant threats and challenges to both the locals and, to a lesser extent, the great powers. Risks from climate change are also a major concern for many ordinary Africans and are exacerbated by state fragility in various ways.</p>
          <p>It is important to note, however, that these challenges are unevenly distributed across Africa’s failing states. Transnational criminals, for instance, tend not to thrive in areas of complete state collapse (such as Somalia, 1991–2004), but instead prefer areas where a basic degree of physical and financial infrastructure exists and where bureaucrats and officials are susceptible to bribery (such as Kenya or Nigeria). Cells of transnational terrorist networks are likely to require similar levels of infrastructure and at least a degree of order if they are to use failing states for anything other than transit routes and temporary bases of operations. The major al-Qa`ida attacks against US embassies in 1998, for instance, took place in Kenya and Tanzania but were allegedly orchestrated from a partially failed state in the form of Sudan and an almost entirely collapsed state in the shape of Somalia. Viewed from a longer-term perspective, however, most terrorism in Africa has been nationally oriented and targeted against white-minority rule or in specific revolutionary settings, notably Ethiopia and Algeria. Attacks by various groups claiming Islamic inspiration have increased this problem significantly since 2011, particularly in Somalia, Kenya, northern Nigeria, Mali, Burkina Faso and other parts of the Sahel.</p>
          <p>During the early stages of the 21st century Africa provided many of the usual suspects on the lists of the world’s failed states including Chad, the Central African Republic (CAR), the DRC, Eritrea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Sudan and Zimbabwe. In addition, for most of this period until late 2012 Somalia was classified in a league of its own as having collapsed altogether rather than simply failed. Since its independence in mid-2011, South Sudan has also joined the ranks of the continent’s most failing states. Africa’s leading status in these rankings has been consistently confirmed by four popular attempts to categorize and measure different types of state failure, namely, the World Bank’s Governance Matters data set, the Failed States Index, the UN Development Programme’s (UNDP) Human Development Index (HDI), and Freedom House’s annual surveys of political freedom.</p>
          <p>The World Bank’s Governance Matters 2019 data ranked worldwide governance indicators, covering 215 economies (countries and territories). It defined governance as `the set of traditions and institutions by which authority in a country is exercised. This includes (1) the process by which governments are selected, monitored and replaced, (2) the capacity of the government to effectively formulate and implement sound policies, and (3) the respect of citizens and the state for the institutions that govern economic and social interactions among them.’ The 2019 update measured six dimensions of governance between 1996 and 2018 based on over 30 underlying data sources: voice and accountability, political stability and absence of violence, government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and control of corruption. The results across these different dimensions confirmed Africa’s place as the global centre of state failure. In particular, of the bottom quartile (roughly 55) economies ranked worldwide, the African continent contained 22 of the world’s least accountable territories, 26 of the most politically unstable and potentially violent territories, 32 of the world’s least effective governments, 29 of the global territories with the worst regulatory quality, 25 of the global territories where the rule of law was weakest, and 25 of the global territories least able to control corruption. Overall, this set of indicators suggested that, once again, the African territories with the consistently worst performing governance structures across the World Bank’s different categories were Somalia, Sudan, South Sudan, Libya, Burundi, the CAR, the DRC, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Guinea-Bissau and Chad.</p>
          <p>
      A similar picture emerged from the Fragile States Index 2020, the new name given in 2014 to what was previously called the Failed States Index, compiled by 
      <i>Foreign Policy</i>
       magazine and the Fund for Peace. This measured performance of 178 countries along 12 political, economic, military and social indicators of instability (demographic pressures, refugees and displaced persons, group grievance, human flight, uneven development, economy, delegitimization of the state, public services, human rights, security apparatus, factionalized elites, and external intervention). The 2020 index concluded that Africa was, by far, the world’s most `fragile’ region with seven of the world’s 10 most were in sub-Saharan Africa: Somalia (second most failing), South Sudan (third), the DRC (fifth), the CAR (sixth), Chad (seventh), Sudan (eighth), and Zimbabwe (10th). This was exactly the same top 10 as in 2019, with Somalia once again ranked the worst in Africa. Continuing down the scale, it suggested that Africa contained 15 of the world’s 20 most fragile states, the same as in 2019, and 34 of the world’s 40 most fragile states, an increase of four states from 2019. It was also notable that four of the world’s 10 `most worsened’ states in the decade from 2010 to 2019 were in Africa: Libya (worst), Mali (third worst), Mozambique (sixth worst), and Eritrea (eighth worst).
    </p>
          <p>The third popular ranking system is UNDP’s HDI. The HDI is a summary measure of average achievement in three key dimensions of human development: a long and healthy life, being knowledgeable, and having a decent standard of living. It focuses on four key indicators (life expectancy at birth, mean and expected years of schooling, and gross national income per capita) to produce the geometric mean of normalized indices for each of the three dimensions. UNDP suggests that this provides a reasonable profile of the extent to which a particular state is promoting human flourishing. From a total of 189 states ranked in 2019, UNDP’s conclusion was startling: 31 of the 34 worst performing states in the world were African. In addition, it should be noted that the index did not include Somalia, presumably owing to the difficulty of gathering data. The 12 worst performers on this list were all in Africa: Niger (189th), the CAR (188th), Chad (187th), South Sudan (186th), Burundi (185th), Mali (184th), Eritrea (183rd), Burkina Faso (182nd), Sierra Leone (181st) and Mozambique (180th). The daily realities behind these figures include several uncomfortable facts: in 2015, 413m. people in sub-Saharan African lived on less than US $1.90 a day; in 2016, over one-quarter were severely food insecure and one in 13 African children died before their fifth birthday; the average life expectancy of someone born in sub-Saharan Africa in 2017 is 60.7 years, up nearly four years from 2013, but much lower than the world average of 72.2 years.</p>
          <p>
      A fourth popular set of indicators is compiled by Freedom House in its annual report, 
      <i>Freedom in the World</i>
      . This measures levels of political freedom, defined as people having `the opportunity to act spontaneously in a variety of fields outside the control of the government and other centres of potential domination’. It does so by assessing the extent to which citizens enjoy political rights and civil liberties in 195 countries (now including the Republic of South Sudan) and 15 disputed territories around the world. According to 
      <i>Freedom in the World 2020</i>
      , Africa is home to eight `free’ countries (down by two from 2019, with Benin and Senegal both dropping out of this category). There are, 25 `partly free’ countries (plus Somaliland) (up by three from 2019), and 21 `not free’ countries, plus Western Sahara, (down by one from 2019). A country is defined as `not free’ when Freedom House judges `basic political rights are absent, and basic civil liberties are widely and systematically denied’. Freedom House’s 2020 classification of 21 African states and the territory of Western Sahara as `not free’ represents a rise of two since 2010. This represents 43% of the global total of 49 `not free’ countries. Of these 21 `not free’ countries, Freedom House placed five African countries—South Sudan, Eritrea, Equatorial Guinea, Somalia, and Libya—in its special category of `the worst of the worst’, i.e. the 10 states globally given the survey’s lowest possible rating. This was two less than in 2019 owing to Sudan and the CAR dropping out of this category. The Freedom House analysis suggested that over the last decade, three African states saw among the world’s biggest declines in freedom, namely, Burundi, Mali and the CAR. Tanzania, Benin, Mozambique, Gabon, Rwanda, Comoros, Djibouti and Uganda also suffered major declines. On the positive side, the biggest improvements in Africa in 2019 came in the DRC, Eswatini, Guinea-Bissau, Ethiopia, Madagascar and Sudan. In terms of population, in 2019, of the roughly 1,100m. people in sub-Saharan Africa’s 49 countries, approximately 11% live in `free’ countries, 52% in `partly free’ countries, and 39% in `not free’ countries.
    </p>
          <p>
      Since late 2007 three new indices relevant to measuring state failure in Africa have appeared in the intellectual marketplace. In September 2007 the Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance was published. Prepared under the auspices of a team led by Rotberg, this project developed a new definition of governance as the delivery of key political goods in five main areas
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.8.0207081215" ref-symbol="7" />
      . Using this definition, the index assessed the quality of governance in the 48 countries of sub-Saharan Africa against 58 individual measures using data from the years 2000, 2002, and 2005 (the former two years were used by the index as base-line indicators). In 2009 the index was updated to include 84 indicators divided into four main categories: Safety and Rule of Law; Participation and Human Rights; Sustainable Economic Opportunity; and Human Development. By 2018 the Index of African Governance was based on 102 indicators and drew data from 35 independent data providers for the period between 2000 and 2017. It is therefore best described as a `poll of polls’ on governance issues in Africa. In the 2012 edition, the index was expanded to include North Africa, bringing the total to 52 states across the continent. The 2015 edition increased the total to 54 African states, including for the first time Sudan and South Sudan as separate entities. At the top end of the governance spectrum, the most recently available 2018 Index once again listed the same top five performers: Mauritius (first), Seychelles (second), Cabo Verde (third), Namibia (fourth), and Botswana (fifth). These countries have occupied the top six places since 2007 but this year Ghana overtook South Africa for sixth place. The bottom of the spectrum was once again occupied by Somalia (54th) and South Sudan (53rd) but this year saw some changes to the other lowest scoring countries with Libya (52nd), Eritrea (51st), the CAR (50th), Sudan (49th), Equatorial Guinea (48th), and the DRC (47th). Based on a trends analysis from 2008 to 2017, the index noted that over the past decade Overall Governance performance has increased slightly with 34 countries exhibiting improved scores, 18 declining, while one remained the same and one had data unavailable. Over that period, Côte d’Ivoire showed the biggest improvement while Libya exhibited the largest decline.
    </p>
          <p>Also in 2007 the Global Peace Index began ranking states according to their level of peacefulness. The index is composed of 23 qualitative and quantitative indicators culled from other sources. It ranks 163 independent states, covering 99.7% of the world’s population. The index gauges world peace using three broad themes: the level of safety and security in society, the extent of domestic and international conflict, and the degree of militarization. Although it is not synonymous with most indicators of state failure, its focus on sources and drivers of conflict and militarization are directly relevant, and hence are included here. The 2020 index concluded that the world has become less peaceful over the last decade, with the average country peacefulness score deteriorating by 0.34%. During 2019 overall global peacefulness declined but, 81 countries saw improvements compared to and 80 recording deteriorations. In sub-Saharan Africa 20 states improved their scores during 2019, the three largest improvements coming in South Africa, Côte d’Ivoire and Equatorial Guinea. In contrast, 24 countries experienced deteriorations, the biggest by far coming in Benin although Niger and Nigeria also saw significant declines. The 2020 index confirmed Africa’s most peaceful countries as Mauritius (23rd), Botswana (33rd), Ghana (43rd), Zambia (44th) and Sierra Leone (46th), At the bottom end of the index, African countries occupied six of the 12 worst positions: South Sudan (160th), Somalia (158th), Libya (157th), the DRC (156th), the CAR (155th) and Sudan (153rd). African countries accounted for 17 of the 39 states listed in the two worst categories (`low’ and `very low’) of the worldwide ranking.</p>
          <p>Finally, it is also relevant to examine the perceived level of corruption within state institutions, as measured by Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index. First launched in 1995, this index asks local people to comment on how corrupt they believe their public sectors to be. The index’s lower-ranked countries are plagued by untrustworthy and badly functioning public institutions, such as the police and judiciary, wherein locals frequently face situations of bribery and extortion and confront official indifference when seeking redress from authorities engaged in such activities. In the 2019 index, of 180 countries that were ranked, African states occupied 23 of the bottom 44 positions. Somalia was perceived as the most corrupt state for the 13th year running (180th), followed by South Sudan (179th), Equatorial Guinea and Sudan (joint 173rd), and Guinea-Bissau and Equatorial Guinea (joint 168th). The index could not collect sufficient data for six African countries, namely Côte d’Ivoire, Cabo Verde, Eswatini, the DRC, Congo and Guinea-Bissau.</p>
          <p>These ranking systems all have significant limitations and have to confront difficult methodological questions, but they do have the benefit of highlighting how unwise it is to generalize about the nature or effects of state failure in Africa. Nevertheless, they all make it abundantly clear that the continent is suffering more than most other parts of the world. Thus, the pertinent practical question is how have locals and outsiders responded?</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>How Have Insiders and Outsiders Responded to State Failure in Africa?</heading>
          <p>It is possible to identify four main types of responses to state failure in Africa. First, there have been external attempts, often led by Western governments, to reassert the failing state’s control over its territory. There have also been similar attempts to encourage Africa’s failing governments to provide their citizens with human rights and basic public goods. A third type of response has occurred in relatively rare instances where international society has been willing to permit states to disintegrate and break into separate smaller units. Finally, there have been the responses of local Africans themselves. These have ranged from active participation in the struggle to rebuild and control state power to indifference and sometimes hostility towards the entire process.</p>
          <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
               <heading>Resurrection</heading>
               <p>Western responses to Africa’s failed states have been selective and intermittent. Selectivity is part and parcel of any state’s foreign policy, and the responses of Western governments to Africa’s failing states have concentrated on those that are perceived to pose the greatest threats to Western security concerns. In the early 2000s, for instance, the US Government was criticized for singling out only two African states—Ethiopia and Sudan—for its Transitional Initiative to encourage democratization in fragile and post-conflict states. This left worthy candidates such as Somalia, the DRC, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Burundi and the CAR with limited funds to help democratization and civil society initiatives. However, Western responses to state failure have also been selective in a more geostrategic sense. Despite suffering from some of the most serious examples of state failure on the planet, the African continent has not attracted a major transitional administration of the kind sponsored by Western states in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo and Timor-Leste. In this sense, state failure in Africa remains on the margins of Western concern even after the events of 11 September 2001. This trend is likely to intensify with the Trump administration’s focus on combating the influence of the People’s Republic of China and the Russian Federation across the continent.</p>
               <p>The selective response of Western governments has been mirrored, and to some extent fostered, by the intermittent and transient Western media coverage given to state failure in Africa. This is usually explained by the fact that failed state stories do not meet enough of the traditional Western news criteria to keep them on the front pages of newspapers or on television screens. The United Kingdom and France appear to have more media coverage of these issues than most Western states but it remains infrequent, concentrated on their former colonies, and often involves stories that score highly in terms of drama, conflict and sensation but provide little in the way of historical background or nuanced explanation. Partly as a result, relatively new media outlets such as Al Jazeera have become much more prominent conveyors of news about Africa. Africans themselves have increasingly filled the gaps with a rapidly growing number of media outlets emanating from the continent.</p>
               <p>Given this context, when Western states have responded in concrete terms to Africa’s failing states, they have usually tried to address the two different types of failure discussed above: the failure to control and the failure to promote human flourishing.</p>
               <p>Outsiders have employed several strategies to help failing states reassert control over the actors within their territorial borders. To date, the most resource-intensive have been those designed to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate (DDR) former combatants, usually orchestrated by some kind of international peacekeeping force. These DDR programmes are then usually followed by a process of `security sector reform’, the current pseudonym for building new, usually broad-based, security institutions, notably the armed forces, police and intelligence services but also increasingly extending to cover the justice sector as well. Once again, however, and reflecting the powerful influence the Westphalian ideal of statehood exerts over the architects of these programmes, such efforts have been criticized for under-estimating the power of informal economies in Africa’s failed states and the crucial roles played by private actors in such settings. As part of the reform process, Western powers have been keen to strengthen the capacity of African states to conduct complex peace operations. The most recent framework was announced at the 2004 Group of Eight industrialized countries (G8) summit, where the leaders pledged a series of programmes to support the training of some 40,000 African peacekeepers (out of a worldwide total of 75,000) to help make the much vaunted African Standby Force (ASF) a reality by its original 2010 deadline. By December 2015 when the ASF was declared officially operational, these training programmes had involved well over 200,000 African peacekeepers. They were an important part in enabling African states to deploy unprecedented numbers of peacekeepers in UN and various African peace operations across the continent.</p>
               <p>
        Following the failure to respond quickly and effectively to the crisis in Mali in early 2012, the AU announced in April 2013 that it was establishing a new smaller African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises (ACIRC). This was to be an interim solution drawing from a reservoir of 5,000 troops, which would comprise tactical battle groups of 1,500 military personnel deployed by a Lead Nation or a group of AU member states. Its purpose is to conduct stabilization and enforcement missions, neutralize terrorist groups, and provide emergency assistance to AU member states
        <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.8.1378296112" ref-symbol="8" />
        . With the declaration that the ASF was operational, in early 2016 the ACIRC was officially subsumed into the standby force structures. In addition to training and helping to equip African peacekeepers, Western states have also deployed small numbers of their own soldiers to so-called `hybrid’ peace operations in some of Africa’s failing states, including the UK in Sierra Leone and Somalia; France in Côte d’Ivoire, the CAR, Mali and across the Sahel; European Union-led operations in the DRC, Chad, the CAR, Mali and Somalia; while the USA has deployed relatively small numbers of special forces and military advisers across the Sahel, central Africa and Somalia. In several cases, however, these efforts have yet to succeed in reasserting state control.
      </p>
               <p>A similar pattern has emerged in relation to external attempts to enhance the provision of public goods in Africa’s failing states. Here, the primary mechanisms have been increasing levels of foreign aid and development assistance, placing diplomatic pressure on African elites to meet the UN Millennium Development Goals and to adopt what the World Bank calls `good governance’, and more general attempts to strengthen the idea that states have a responsibility to protect the human rights of their own citizens. Western powers also started to pay greater attention to co-ordinating their responses across all the relevant dimensions of state failure, including acknowledging the need to prevent state failure rather than just to manage its consequences. To date, however, recent evidence from countries such as Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Mali and Zimbabwe suggests that preventing state failure is a hugely difficult challenge.</p>
          </gen-section>
          <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
               <heading>The State is Dead, Long Live the State</heading>
               <p>A third type of response has been far less prevalent in Africa. Despite the continuing problems confronting attempts to resurrect Africa’s failed states, it has been rare for the great powers within international society to countenance their disintegration or what Jeffrey Herbst has called the `let them fail’ approach. Nevertheless, such a response is possible, as indicated by the belated recognition of an independent Namibia and Eritrea, Western Sahara’s UN-endorsed (but currently stalled) referendum on secession from Morocco, and the secession of South Sudan. These exceptions have usually occurred when insurgencies have succeeded in gaining and sustaining control over significant areas of territory, frequently through a military struggle. The rarity of this outcome suggests two things. First, given the relatively large number of insurgencies in Africa, the small number of secessions suggests that it is difficult for such movements to achieve decisive military victories over incumbent regimes and maintain control of sizeable territories for long periods of time when they do. The evidence of failed secessionist efforts in Ambazonia, Azawad, Biafra, and Cabinda seem to support this conclusion, although Somaliland’s longstanding de facto control of north-west Somalia is a more complicated case. Second, international society’s general reluctance to countenance the `death’ of states and their breaking into smaller units demonstrates the power that the Westphalian ideal of statehood continues to exert even in the face of such implausible candidates for `successful’ state building as Nigeria and the DRC.</p>
               <p>In Herbst’s opinion, the crucial issue is not to concentrate on resurrecting the old failed state, but to think through what the alternatives to failed states might look like and `to increase the congruence between the way that power is actually exercised and the design of units’. As the examples in Somalia noted above suggest, it is clear that alternative units and structures already exist, but very few of them are granted official recognition by international society. The first step in this recognition process would be for international society to countenance decertifying states when they fail to meet their sovereign responsibilities (of either control or promoting basic standards of human flourishing). Indeed, US governments have previously indulged in this kind of activity by designating certain countries including Iraq, Iran, Libya, Syria and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as rogue, pariah or evil states, which are unfit to participate as normal members of international society. The logical next step is to decide the criteria for selecting potential new states. This will be controversial, but a reasonable place to start, as Herbst suggests, is with the question of which actors or institutions are actually providing political order in a given territory. Herbst concludes that `the long-term aim would be to provide international recognition to the governmental units that are actually providing order to their citizens as opposed to relying on the fictions of the past’. Once again, however, there is little evidence of this approach taking root in practice.</p>
          </gen-section>
          <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
               <heading>Local Competition and Local Indifference</heading>
               <p>Finally, it is important to analyse local responses to state failure in Africa. The first point to note is that these have not been uniform. Some locals have competed to lead the resurrection process and, hopefully, benefit from the material resources that flow from it, including foreign aid, humanitarian assistance and loans from the international financial institutions. Others, however, have tried their best to ignore the collapse of central government institutions and continue to bypass state power in many aspects of their everyday lives. In southern Africa, for instance, states have long failed to meet the needs of the region’s peoples. Given the imperial foundations of the region’s states, this is hardly surprising. As a consequence, as Peter Vale has argued, ordinary southern Africans have lost faith in, and increasingly bypass, a state system that `neither delivers security nor satisfies a desire for community’. Instead, they have engaged in alternative forms of social intercourse related to, among other things, religious affiliations, trading associations, musicology, and migration patterns, all of which show little respect for the political borders erected by southern Africa’s states. In this sense, many ordinary Africans have become adept at forming accommodation strategies in a variety of different arenas to fulfil their needs when their state has failed them.</p>
               <p>
        Over time, this has produced many different attitudes to `the state’ in Africa, from squabbling elites desperate to resurrect and then control new state institutions, to ordinary people who are often either indifferent or explicitly hostile to state building projects focused on the urban centres. In Somalia, for example, not only have certain groups carried on their lives in spite of the collapse of the central state (from 1991–2012) but they are extremely suspicious of any attempts to revive it. Whereas the conventional wisdom of Western-dominated institutions dictates that an effective central state is a prerequisite for national development, many Somalis view the state as `an instrument of accumulation and domination, enriching and empowering those who control it and exploiting and oppressing the rest’
        <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.8.0207081214" ref-symbol="9" />
        . As a consequence, there have been a variety of groups hostile to international efforts to resuscitate the trappings of central government in the Somali capital, Mogadishu. This also raises the important observation made by Menkhaus that state building and peacebuilding might at times be `mutually antagonistic enterprises in Somalia’. Consequently, outsiders should not automatically assume that insiders are united on the need to resurrect failed states. Instead, they should canvass the opinion of insiders and think carefully about when alternatives to failed states should be put into practice.
      </p>
          </gen-section>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Conclusions</heading>
          <p>What conclusions follow from this analysis of state failure in Africa? In response to the first question, `what is meant by state failure?’, it was suggested that most of the contemporary debate is based upon a particular conception of statehood that invokes an ideal formalized at the Treaties of Westphalia in 1648. For a variety of reasons, this ideal has not successfully taken root in many parts of Africa. As a consequence, not only is state failure widespread on the continent, but significant parts of it should be understood as remaining in the early stages of the state formation process and much more turmoil should therefore be expected. In order to understand the contemporary dynamics of this process, analysts should pay closer attention to the configurations of power on the continent and move beyond state-centric and statist approaches. One plausible alternative would be to utilize the neo-Gramscian approach with its focus on the inter-relationships between states, social forces, ideas and world orders. This would provide a set of conceptual tools to help understand the phenomenon of `neopatrimonialism without the state’.</p>
          <p>In terms of the causes of state failure, contemporary debates distinguish between those states that choose to fail certain segments of their populations, and those that lack the resources effectively to control their territory. In addition, although a wide array of structural and contingent factors continue to generate discussion, collective knowledge about these processes remains limited and unable to predict the tipping points in particular cases. Finally, there is the crucial practical question of responses to state failure in Africa. For outsiders at least, the most common approach has been to resurrect the institutions of state power, usually following Weberian and liberal blueprints. However, as the case of Somalia demonstrates, the processes of state building and peacebuilding may sometimes be mutually exclusive enterprises. Moreover, resurrection strategies may, in the short term at least, make collapsed states a more attractive destination for extremist organizations. In spite of such problems, it is only rarely that international society has agreed to the disintegration of existing states into smaller ones. Sometimes, some insiders have joined the competition to control these new units. In contrast, other insiders have continued to bypass a state system that has consistently failed to meet their basic needs. This suggests that the real solution to state failure in Africa lies in developing political communities that can provide for the needs of their members and gain recognition in wider global politics. How closely these communities will resemble the ideal of Westphalian statehood remains to be seen.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Footnotes</heading>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.8.0207081208" ref-symbol="1">
      Hill, J. `Beyond the Other? A postcolonial critique of the failed state thesis’ in 
      <i>African Identities</i>
      , Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 139–140, 2005.
    </endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.8.0207081209" ref-symbol="2">
      See, for example, Dorff, Robert H. `Failed States After 9/11: What did we know and what have we learned?’ in 
      <i>International Studies Perspectives</i>
      , Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 20–34, 2005. Dorff refers to these two conceptions of failure as `the ungovernable state’ and the `bad government state’.
    </endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.8.0207081210" ref-symbol="3">
      The seminal statements of this perspective are R. W. Cox’s `Social Forces, States and World Orders: Beyond International Relations Theory’ in 
      <i>Millennium</i>
      , Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 126–55, 1981; `Gramsci, Hegemony and International Relations: An essay in method’ in 
      <i>Millennium</i>
      , Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 162–75,&#160;1983; and 
      <i>Production, Power, and World Order</i>
      . New York, Columbia University Press, 1987. See also Barnett, M. `Authority, intervention and the outer limits of international relations theory’ in Callaghy, T., Kassimir, R., and Latham, R. (Eds). 
      <i>Intervention and Transnationalism in Africa</i>
      . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2001.
    </endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.8.0207081211" ref-symbol="4">See `Current and Projected National Security Threats to the United States’, Vice Adm. Lowell E. Jacoby, US Navy, Director, Defense Intelligence Agency. Statement for the Record Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, 24 February 2004. www.dia.mil/publicaffairs/Testimonies/statement12.html.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.8.1315020708" ref-symbol="5">
      Clapham, C. 
      <i>et al</i>
       (Eds). 
      <i>Big African States</i>
      , p. 1. Johannesburg, Wits University Press, 2006.
    </endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.8.0207081212" ref-symbol="6">
      Fukuyama, F. 
      <i>State-Building: Governance and World Order in the 21st Century</i>
      , p. 92. Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2004.
    </endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.8.0207081215" ref-symbol="7">The five categories are: safety and security; rule of law, transparency and corruption; participation and human rights; sustainable economic development; and human development.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.8.1378296112" ref-symbol="8">Report of the Chairperson of the Commission on the Operationalisation of the Rapid Deployment Capability of the African Standby Force and the Establishment of an `African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises’. (AU doc. RPT/Exp/VI/STCDSS/(i-a)2013, 29–30 April 2013).</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.8.0207081214" ref-symbol="9">
      Menkhaus, K. `State Collapse in Somalia: Second Thoughts’ in 
      <i>Review of African Political Economy</i>
      , No. 97, p. 409, 2003.
    </endnote>
     </gen-section>
     <bibl-section id="ASS.ESSAY.8.151806072010" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="BIBL-REF">
          <heading>Bibliography</heading>
          <bibl-list>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Bates, R. H. 
        <i>When Things Fell Apart: State Failure in Late-Century Africa</i>
        . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2007.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Call, C. T. `The Fallacy of the `Failed State” in 
        <i>Third World Quarterly</i>
        , Vol. 29, No. 8, pp. 1491–1507, 2008.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Clapham, C. `Degrees of Statehood’ in 
        <i>Review of International Studies</i>
        , Vol. 24, pp. 143–157, 1998.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
        `The Challenge to the State in a Globalized World’ in 
        <i>Development and Change</i>
        , Vol. 33, No. 5, pp. 775–795, 2002.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
        `Terrorism in Africa: Problems of Definition, History and Development’ in 
        <i>South African Journal of International Affairs</i>
        , Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 13–28, 2003.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Clapham, C., Herbst J., and Mills G. (Eds). 
        <i>Big African States</i>
        . Johannesburg, Wits University Press, 2006.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Englebert, P., and Tull, D. M. `Postconflict Reconstruction in Africa: Flawed Ideas about Failed States’ in 
        <i>International Security</i>
        , Vol. 32, No. 4, pp. 106–139, 2008.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Evans, G. 
        <i>The Responsibility to Protect</i>
        . Washington, DC, Brookings Institution Press, 2008.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Fukuyama, F. 
        <i>State-Building: Governance and World Order in the 21st Century</i>
        . Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2004.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Giddens, A. 
        <i>The Nation State and Violence</i>
        . Berkeley, CA, University of California Press, 1987.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Herbst, J. 
        <i>States and Power in Africa</i>
        . Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 2000.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Hobson, J. M. 
        <i>The State in International Relations</i>
        . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2000.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Holm, H. `Failing Failed States: Who Forgets the Forgotten?’ in 
        <i>Security Dialogue</i>
        , Vol. 33, No. 4, pp. 457–471, 2002.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Jackson, R. H. 
        <i>Quasi-States: Sovereignty, International Relations and the Third World</i>
        . Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1990.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Linklater, A. 
        <i>The Transformation of Political Community</i>
        . Cambridge, Polity, 1998.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Menkhaus, K. `State Collapse in Somalia: Second Thoughts’ in 
        <i>Review of African Political Economy</i>
        , No. 97, pp. 405–422, 2003.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
        `Somalia and Somaliland’ in Rotberg, R. I. (Ed.), 
        <i>Battling Terrorism in the Horn of Africa</i>
        . Washington, DC, Brookings Institution Press, 2005.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
        `Governance without Government in Somalia: Spoilers, State Building, and the Politics of Coping’ in 
        <i>International Security</i>
        , Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 74–106, 2006/07.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Milliken, J., and Krause, K. `State Failure, State Collapse, and State Reconstruction: Concepts, Lessons and Strategies’ in 
        <i>Development and Change</i>
        , Vol. 33, No. 5, pp. 753–774, 2002.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Patrick, S. `Weak States and Global Threats: Fact or Fiction?’ in 
        <i>The Washington Quarterly</i>
        , Vol. 29, No. 2, pp. 27–53, 2006.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
        `Why Failed States Shouldn’t be our Biggest National Security Fear’ in 
        <i>The Washington Post</i>
        , 15 April 2011.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Raeymaekers, T. 
        <i>Collapse or Order? Questioning State Collapse in Africa</i>
        . Conflict Research Group, Working Paper No. 1, May 2005.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Reno, W. 
        <i>Warlord Politics and African States</i>
        . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1998.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Rotberg, R. I. (Ed.). 
        <i>When States Fail: Causes and Consequences</i>
        . Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 2004.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Spear, J. `From Political Economies of War to Political Economies of Peace: The Contribution of DDR after Wars of Predation’ in 
        <i>Contemporary Security Policy</i>
        , Vol. 27, No. 1, pp. 168–189, 2006.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Stedman, S. J. `Spoiler Problems and Peace Processes’ in 
        <i>International Security</i>
        , Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 5–53, 1997.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Taylor, I. 
        <i>NEPAD: Towards Africa’s Development or Another False Start?</i>
         Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2005.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
        `Blind Spots in Analyzing Africa’s Place in World Politics’ in 
        <i>Global Governance</i>
        , Vol. 10, pp. 411–417, 2004.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Teschke, B. 
        <i>The Myth of 1648: Class, Geopolitics and the Making of Modern International Relations</i>
        . London, Verso, 2003.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Vale, P. 
        <i>Security and Politics in South Africa: The Regional Dimension</i>
        . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2003.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Walter, B. F., and Snyder, J. (Eds). 
        <i>Civil Wars, Insecurity, and Intervention</i>
        . New York, Columbia University Press, 1999.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Williams, P. D. 
        <i>War and Conflict in Africa.</i>
         2nd edn. Cambridge, Polity Press, 2016.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Woods, N. `The Shifting Politics of Foreign Aid’ in 
        <i>International Affairs</i>
        , Vol. 81, No. 2, pp. 393–409, 2005.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Zartman, W. I. (Ed.). 
        <i>Collapsed States: The Disintegration and Restoration of Legitimate Authority</i>
        . Boulder, CO, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1995.
      </bibl-entry>
          </bibl-list>
     </bibl-section>
</essay>