<?xml version="1.0"?>
<essay id="ASS.ESSAY.30" id-root="ass.essay.30" iso="" region="ASS" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ESSAY-REF" usage="ass" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
     <heading>Beyond Françafrique—the State of Relations Between France and Africa</heading>
     <alt-heading type="SECTION-LONG-UPPERCASE" usage="ass">General Survey</alt-heading>
     <alt-heading type="COUNTRY-SHORT-TITLECASE" usage="ass">
    Beyond 
    <i>Françafrique</i>
     </alt-heading>
     <author-group>
          <primary-authors>
               <person-name>
                    <forename>Tony</forename>
                    <surname>Chafer</surname>
                    <regnal>Professor of African and French Studies, Centre for European and International Studies, University of Portsmouth, United Kingdom</regnal>
               </person-name>
          </primary-authors>
     </author-group>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Introduction: The Context of Franco-African Relations</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P1">From the early 20th century the possession of a colonial empire became the benchmark of the French claim to great power status. Africa was central to this claim, not least because of the increasingly important economic ties between France and its African colonies and the key role played by African troops who fought for France during the two world wars. Confronted with the emergence of the two new superpowers on the global stage, namely the USA and the Soviet Union, after the humiliations of the Second World War, the maintenance of empire became even more important to France’s continuing claim to world power status. This was to lead France into two hugely destructive wars of decolonization, which put paid to any hope of a peaceful, negotiated redefinition of the imperial relationship in Indochina and Algeria. The question of how to maintain France’s world power status thus became all the more urgent. Morocco and Tunisia were granted independence in 1956 and, with the situation in Algeria deteriorating rapidly and France desperate to avoid the opening of a `second front’ in sub-Saharan Africa, the Government embarked on a programme of political reform in its colonies south of the Sahara that was designed to defuse the nationalist threat and show their populations that they had a viable future as French overseas territories (as the colonial empire was now called). Following an attempted coup by army officers in Algiers, Charles de Gaulle returned to power in 1958 and quickly realized that, if France was to maintain good relations with, and influence in, Africa, it would need to ride the anti-colonial tide that had been sweeping across Asia and Africa and grant its sub-Saharan African colonies independence.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P2">
      De Gaulle’s strategy for maintaining France’s world power status in the post-colonial era had four pillars: the development of an independent nuclear deterrent; the retention of France’s permanent seat on the United Nations (UN) Security Council; the positioning of France alongside Germany at the heart of the project to construct a new Europe; and the maintenance of a sphere of influence in Africa. It was this latter pillar that laid the basis for the `special relationship’ with Africa—often referred to as 
      <i>la Françafrique</i>
      —that emerged after France’s colonies in sub-Saharan Africa gained their independence in 1960. The first use of the term has been widely attributed to Félix Houphouët-Boigny, the first President of Côte d’Ivoire, who was an enthusiastic supporter of close relations with France. However, there is no evidence that he ever actually used the word. It was François-Xavier Verschave who popularized the term with his 1998 book 
      <i>La Françafrique: le plus long scandale de la République</i>
      . On the surface, a dense array of official links that included defence and military assistance accords, economic aid, political and cultural links—the latter in particular through 
      <i>la Francophonie</i>
      —and the maintenance of a common currency zone (see below) bound France to its former colonies in sub-Saharan Africa and was underpinned by the language of 
      <i>cooperation</i>
      , or partnership. These official links were accompanied by a range of semi-official and unofficial family-like ties that were epitomized by the Franco-African summits, instituted at the instigation of President Hamani Diori of Niger in 1973, which brought the French President together with African and French political leaders in an annual celebration of their special relationship. The summits were more like a family gathering than an official summit meeting, as there was no published agenda and no final communiqué was issued. Regular French presidential visits to Africa and visits by African presidents to Paris further strengthened the ties between France and francophone African countries.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P3">
      For Verschave, however, beneath the image of France as the best friend of Africa, committed to a new partnership for development, the reality of the Franco-African `special relationship’ was quite different: for him it denoted a dense web of political, economic, social, cultural and military ties, often associated with a range of corrupt practices, that France maintained with its former colonies in Africa after independence and that was underpinned by highly personalised networks (`
      <i>réseaux</i>
      ’) of public and private sector actors in both France and Africa. When de Gaulle became president, Jacques Foccart became his special adviser on African affairs and was given the task of maintaining France’s position in Africa 
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.30.11823301148" ref-symbol="1" />
      . To fulfil this mission he was accused of using various methods to place, or keep, in power African heads of state who were `friends of France’, for example through war (in Cameroon), military intervention, electoral fraud, political assassinations, or other operations designed to maintain francophone African countries’ dependency on France in what it still today regards as its privileged sphere of influence. The term 
      <i>Françafrique</i>
       , through its homonym `France à fric’
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.30.1182330595" ref-symbol="2" />
      , was also used to refer to the misappropriation of funds, ranging from the payment of kickbacks to African political leaders and illegal funding of political parties to the illicit use of debt relief and development aid to finance Franco-African political-business networks. In essence, then, 
      <i>Françafrique</i>
       became shorthand for a neocolonial relationship that was often characterized by illicit, sometimes criminal, practices.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P4">The close inter-linking of these official, semi-official, unofficial and illicit dimensions of the relationship, and support for them at the summit of the French state, no matter which of the main parties of the left or right was in power, was the key to their enduring nature. Moreover, somewhat less tangibly but no less importantly, French and African governing elites cultivated a sense of association and common heritage between France and Africa which served to cement the links between them. Both during and after the colonial period the projection of the `universal’ French republican values of liberty, equality and fraternity offered generations of francophone Africans the hope of progress and the prospect of a partnership with France to bring it about. At the same time, the idea that, thanks to their shared history and experience, France has a special understanding of Africa and Africans has had a powerful influence in shaping the attitudes and mind-sets of governing elites in both France and Francophone Africa.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>The `Special Relationship’ and the Establishment of a French Privileged Sphere of Influence in Africa</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P5">
      Once it became clear that political independence was inevitable, the priority was to ensure that decolonization did not mark an end, but rather a restructuring, of the imperial relationship in sub-Saharan Africa (Chafer, 2016a). In Indochina and Algeria, where France fought two wars of decolonization, political independence marked a real watershed in relations. South of the Sahara, with the notable exceptions of Cameroon, where a little known war of decolonization resulted in up to 100,000 deaths, and Guinea, where Ahmed Sekou Touré’s decision to defy de Gaulle and declare immediate independence in 1958 led to a more turbulent transition, the transfer of power was largely peaceful and smooth. France’s former colonies in West and Central Africa—the so-called 
      <i>pays du champ</i>
      —were to be at the centre of its 
      <i>pré carré</i>
       (privileged sphere of influence) on the continent
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.30.1182330596" ref-symbol="3" />
      .
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P6">
      This was achieved in a number of different ways. The Franc Zone tied the French franc to the currency of its former colonies in Africa at a fixed rate and obliged the countries using the CFA franc to deposit the majority of their foreign currency reserves with the Banque de France in Paris
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.30.11823305967" ref-symbol="4" />
      . There was a Ministry of Co-operation, successor to the colonial Ministry for Overseas France, whose minister had a seat on the Council of Ministers; this ministry was effectively a ministry for sub-Saharan francophone Africa and as such represented a symbol of France’s continuing commitment to its former colonies on the continent. Two-thirds of French development aid went to these countries and France also signed cultural, technical and military co-operation accords with most of its former colonies at independence. The sending of large numbers of 
      <i>coopérants</i>
       (volunteers seconded from France) as teachers, university lecturers and educational advisers to former French Africa served to maintain, and indeed reinforce, the position of the French language and the French cultural presence in these countries. In addition, other specialists, such as financial and military advisers, were sent to Africa to work for the newly independent governments. Defence agreements, which France signed with many of its former colonies at or shortly after independence, set the framework within which French military interventions—some 35 between 1960 and 1994—were undertaken. France also maintained a dense network of embassies across the continent. Finally, with the establishment of the Fifth Republic in 1958, Africa policy became the 
      <i>domaine réservé</i>
       (`reserved domain’) of the President, which meant that decision making largely bypassed the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; instead, Africa policy was largely made by the President in close consultation with his `Africa cell’ of special advisers and was not subject to the normal processes of parliamentary scrutiny. This personalization of policymaking was an important vehicle for the cultivation of regional friends among Africa’s political leaders, a practice that was facilitated by the fact that many of the leaders of the newly independent states of francophone Africa had been elected members of the Assemblée Nationale (National Assembly), and even become French government ministers, in Paris under the Fourth Republic from 1946-1958.
    </p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Challenges to Françafrique in the 1990s</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P7">
      At the international level, the political context within which 
      <i>la Françafrique</i>
       had thrived changed after 1990. During the Cold War Washington saw France’s continuing presence, in a part of the world that was not a strategic priority and that it did not know well, as desirable to ensure that the region did not fall into the clutches of Moscow. This tacit division of responsibilities suited both France and the USA for the duration of the Cold War and afforded France a `space’ on the international stage in which it was able to present itself as the guarantor of Western interests in sub-Saharan Africa. However, it is important to recognize that France’s motives in maintaining this special relationship with francophone Africa were in practice fundamentally different from those of the USA in allowing it to do so: whereas US policy was driven by Cold War concerns, France was motivated above all by the strategic need to maintain a privileged sphere of influence in Africa. Thus, while the USA saw the maintenance of a French sphere of influence as essential to the containment of communism in Africa, successive French governments saw the 
      <i>pré carré</i>
       as a means of containing `Anglo-Saxon’—for which read US and British—influence.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P8">
      With the change in the geopolitical context following the end of the Cold War, France could no longer claim that it was the `anchor’ that protected the interests of the West by maintaining francophone sub-Saharan Africa in the Western camp. The end of the Cold War also provoked a rapid transition to multi-partyism in Africa, which resulted in a notably less stable policy environment. In several West and Central African countries, increased conflict and political fragmentation, combined with the debt crisis and severe economic problems, threatened French influence and raised the cost to France of maintaining its 
      <i>pré carré.</i>
          </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P9">Alongside these international developments, changes in Paris were also affecting the context within which policymaking on Africa was formulated. Following the end of the Cold War, cracks began to appear at the domestic level in the `Gaullist consensus’ that had underpinned French Africa policy since 1960. The democratic revolutions in Central and Eastern Europe after the fall of the Berlin Wall raised questions in Paris about the desirability of maintaining close relations with African dictators who had poor human rights records. Recognizing that France could no longer be seen to be supporting these authoritarian regimes, President François Mitterrand signalled a significant break with past French practice at the 1990 Franco-African summit in La Baule by stating that in future France would reward those governments that committed themselves to political reform. Political conditionality in this form had traditionally never been part of French Africa policy and, even if the policy was in practice extremely unevenly applied, the speech sent a warning shot across the bows of African leaders who refused to undertake reforms (Cumming, 1996). Questions were also being raised in Paris about the value and effectiveness of French development aid, which had signally failed to promote economic take-off even though France had spent large sums of money since political independence supporting its former colonies (see, for example, Brunel, 1993).</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P10">
      Against this background, three developments in the mid-1990s marked a clear watershed in French Africa policy. The first of these was the announcement by Prime Minister Edouard Balladur of the so-called `Abidjan doctrine’, whereby French budgetary support for African states became conditional upon the prior conclusion of structural adjustment agreements with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. This required states in the 
      <i>pré carré</i>
       to restructure their economies `in accordance with the principles of international liberalism or accept their decline and marginalization’ (Bourmaud, 1996). Importantly, the adoption of this doctrine marked an end to one of the distinguishing features of 
      <i>la Françafrique</i>
      : the provision of financial assistance to countries in the 
      <i>pré carré</i>
       without any formal economic conditions attached. From now on, only countries undertaking an IMF/World Bank-sponsored reform programme would be eligible for French aid.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P11">
      The second development was the devaluation of the CFA franc following the death of the Ivorian President Houphouët-Boigny in December 1993. Immediately after his death the CFA franc was devalued by 50% on 12 January 1994, a measure which he had resisted for a number of years. This produced an immediate 50% reduction in the cost to France of its support to Africa, resulting in a sharp reduction in the bilateral development aid budget between 1995 and 2001, in both value (down from €4,137,000m. to €2,653,000m.) and percentage terms (the proportion of bilateral aid to multilateral aid went down from 73% to 59.7%). However, the devaluation was experienced by many African leaders in the 
      <i>pré carré</i>
       as a betrayal of the Franco-African special relationship. The subsequent closure of the Ministry of Co-operation, which African leaders of the 
      <i>pré carré</i>
       had traditionally seen as `their’ ministry, and its merger in 1998 with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, further contributed to the impression that the Franco-African special relationship—
      <i> la Françafrique</i>
      —was changing.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P12">
      If the adoption of the Abidjan doctrine and the subsequent devaluation of the CFA franc represented the first two major new policy initiatives towards Africa in the post-Cold War period, it was France’s controversial role in the events leading up to and following the Rwandan genocide of 1994 that arguably provoked the most far-reaching re-evaluation of French Africa policy (Chafer, 2005; Kroslak, 2007). Following the shooting down of Rwandan President Juvenal Habyarimana’s plane in April 1994, his supporters were responsible for the killing of some 800,000 Rwandan Tutsis and moderate Hutus within the space of two months. Although domestic criticism of French involvement in Rwanda was relatively muted at the time, there was widespread, and well-publicized, condemnation of France in the foreign press and by international non-governmental organizations (see in particular Human Rights Watch, 1995) because it had, from 1990–94, been the main external military supporter of the Habyarimana regime, providing both training and equipment to the Rwandan military. As a consequence of this criticism, members of France’s governing elites and sections of the French press began increasingly to question the benefits to France of the Franco-African special relationship. The Ministry of Defence, in particular, stung by international criticism of the French armed forces’ role in the run-up to the genocide and keen to shed France’s image as the `gendarme’ of Africa (Vallin, 2015), launched a wide-ranging review of the French military presence and its role in sub-Saharan Africa. This led 
      <i>inter alia</i>
       to the idea of creating, with French support, an African peacekeeping force, driven on the one hand by the need to maintain international acceptance for France’s military effort on the continent, and on the other by the desire to reduce the reputational risks of this effort. The decision was also taken to reduce the number of French troops stationed in Africa, with two bases in the Central African Republic (CAR) being closed in 1999
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.30.11823305989" ref-symbol="5" />
      . Finally, as part of its strategy to forestall criticism of its military interventions, successive French governments have, since the turn of the century, made efforts to obtain the approval of the UN Security Council and of Africa’s regional or subregional organizations, such as the African Union (AU) and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), for French military operations on the continent.
    </p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>From Unilateralism to Multilateralism</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P13">
      Until the mid-1990s France had adopted a unilateral approach to Africa. Formally, its relations with its ex-colonies were conducted on the basis of bilateral agreements. This was as true of its aid policy as it was of its military policy. With an array of bilateral defence and military assistance accords signed with its former colonies at independence and up to 10,000 soldiers either stationed or taking part in military operations in its former colonies 30 years after independence, France undertook some 35 unilateral, direct military interventions on the continent between 1964 and 1995 and pursued a policy of substitution for, rather than partnership with, African military forces in its post-colonial sphere of influence, the `
      <i>pré carré</i>
      ’.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P14">This began to change in the late 1990s. At the December 1998 Franco-British summit in Saint-Malo, France, the British and French Governments declared their intention to set aside a century of rivalry, to `harmonise policies towards Africa and pursue close cooperation on the ground&#160;…&#160;[and] promote subregional integration, in particular between networks of anglophone and francophone countries’. This opened the door to French co-operation with the United Kingdom in Africa. At the same time, there was convergence between the USA, the UK and France on the need to train African troops for peacekeeping duties on the continent, with the USA in particular reluctant to undertake military interventions in Africa following its recent humiliation in Somalia. All three countries now supported the aim to enhance the capacity of African military forces to provide effective peacekeeping or humanitarian relief operations. Thus, in 1996, the USA launched its African Crisis Response Initiative programme and in 1997 the UK launched its African Peacekeeping Training Support Programme, while France introduced its RECAMP (Renforcement des Capacités Africaines de Maintien de la Paix—Strengthening Africa’s Peacekeeping Capacity) programme, with similar objectives to the US and British programmes, in the same year. This marked a watershed in French policy as it sought to move away from its traditional approach of direct, unilateral, military intervention by French troops towards a policy of supporting Africans to undertake peacekeeping operations themselves. This convergence was one of the factors that led to the establishment in 1997 of the so-called `P3’ initiative, an informal grouping which brought the USA, the UK and France together at the level of the UN Security Council in an effort to co-ordinate their positions and harmonize their peacekeeping capacity-building programmes in Africa.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P15">In West Africa the civil war in Liberia (and its regional spillover) was a further catalyst for the French change to a more multilateral approach. Following Charles Taylor’s 1997 presidential election victory, opposition to his brutal and repressive regime grew and the country’s second civil war broke out in 1999, threatening once again to engulf the entire region. This danger, as well as the threat to British expatriates, led to the British Government’s decision to send troops to Sierra Leone in 2000 and the French Government’s decision to relinquish its support for Taylor, as it feared that the conflict could impact on security throughout the region and undermine the stability of key French regional allies such as Côte d’Ivoire. This increased French readiness to work with the USA and the UK and opened the door to British-French-US collaboration in the region (Chafer, 2013).</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P16">An early example of co-ordination at the level of the `P3’ was the series of UN Security Council resolutions on the Mano River countries in 2002–03. Continuing conflict and instability in Liberia, Sierra Leone and, from 2002, Côte d’Ivoire, were a concern, respectively, for the USA, the UK and France. All three countries recognized that the conflicts were not confined to one country, that there was potential for `regional contagion’ and that they could not be resolved on an individual country basis. Importantly also, the `P3’ saw that they could benefit from working together on peace and security issues in the region as, thanks to its close links with the country, the UK had a comparative advantage in dealing with Sierra Leone, while France had a similar comparative advantage in Côte d’Ivoire and the USA in Liberia. The various UN Security Council resolutions from 1999 onwards, on Sierra Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire respectively, provided an example of the `P3’ working in concert, in the first instance bilaterally with key regional actors such as Nigeria and Senegal and then, via them, to influence other ECOWAS member states.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P17">The attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon in the USA in September 2001 (`9/11’) reinforced this converging focus on security issues between France, the UK and the USA, as Africa became a key arena of the `war on terror’. This led to further co-operation at the level of the `P3’ on African security issues; for example, Security Council Resolution 1498 in August 2003 renewed authorization for French and West African forces operating in Côte d’Ivoire, and this was followed by a series of further resolutions from 2004 onwards, establishing the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), renewing the mandate of French and West African forces, and reinforcing the sanctions regime in the country.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P18">In addition to sharing the costs and risks of French African policy, this new, multilateral approach reflected the fact that France was operating in an increasingly multipolar and competitive global environment, in which its position in Africa was coming under challenge from emerging powers such as the People’s Republic of China and India. The adoption of a multilateral approach, working with international and regional partners and also, increasingly, through the European Union (EU, see below), combined with close bilateral relations with key individual countries, was now seen as the most effective way for France as a medium-sized power to maintain its position as a major player on the continent.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Domestic Pressures for Change</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P19">
      The changed international context not only made it more difficult for France to act alone in Africa, but also greatly reduced the political dividends from doing so because of the growing criticism, both internationally and from within Africa, of French policy. Africa policy became the subject of disagreements between the so-called `traditionalists’ (
      <i>les anciens</i>
      ) and `modernizers’ (
      <i>les modernes</i>
      ) (Bourmaud, 1996; Gounin, 2009). While both sides agreed that France should maintain an active role on the continent, the `traditionalists’ clung to the old ways and advocated maintaining the unilateral approach that had in their view served France well until the 1990s, whereas the `modernizers’ believed that France needed to change its approach, expand the French presence beyond its traditional 
      <i>pré carré</i>
      , and co-operate more with other powers, if it was to continue to be a significant player on the continent. 
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P20">
      Other developments on the domestic stage contributed to the shift in approach. During the 1990s two periods of political `cohabitation’, between a president of the Left and a prime minister of the Right (Mitterrand and Balladur, 1993–95) and then between a president of the Right and a prime minister of the Left (Jacques Chirac and Lionel Jospin, 1997–2002) meant that Africa policy became less exclusively a presidential 
      <i>domaine réservé</i>
      . We have already seen how Prime Minister Balladur pushed through a major change in French economic policy towards Africa. Similarly, in 1997, Prime Minister Jospin was determined not to leave Africa policy to President Chirac. A `modernizer’ in terms of Africa policy, Jospin pushed through the abolition of the Ministry of Co-operation and a significant reduction in the French bilateral aid budget. During his premiership, the notion of 
      <i>pays du champ</i>
      , considered too redolent of the outdated notion of a French colonial `backyard’, was abandoned in favour of the idea of a Zone de Solidarité Prioritaire. All 54 countries in the zone, 44 of which were in Africa, would henceforth be eligible for French aid. This was supposed to dilute the family-like special relationship with Africa, as the 44 included former British and Portuguese colonies that were not part of France’s traditional 
      <i>pré carré</i>
      . As noted above, Jospin also reduced the number of French troops stationed in Africa and in December 1999 refused to send troops to Côte d’Ivoire to support President Henri Konan Bédié, who was overthrown in a military coup. President Chirac’s African adviser, Michel Dupuch, wanted to intervene in support of Bédié who, with French support, had succeeded long-time French ally Houphouët-Boigny as President in 1993. However, Jospin overruled him, thereby challenging the notion of Africa as a presidential 
      <i>domaine réservé</i>
      , where the President both called the policy shots and was the unchallenged spokesman on French Africa policy. Some commentators at the time saw this as another step away from the old-style family-like relationship with francophone Africa and towards the `normalization’ of French policy.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P21">Finally, the cost of the French military presence and interventions in Africa is substantial. Against the background of growing pressure on public finances and reductions in the defence budget, burden-sharing represented the only possibility for France to meet the costs of maintaining its military position on the continent.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Towards the `Europeanization’ of Africa Policy?</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P22">As part of the shift towards a multilateral approach, `Europeanization’ meant that France would, in principle, co-ordinate its policy with the EU, which would also play a greater role in the implementation of Africa policy. From a French perspective, this had the advantage of sharing the costs and political risks of its Africa policy with other EU member states and of helping France to avoid the charge of neocolonialism. In the military sphere, it was also hoped that an EU military operation would not have the same direct association with France as a solely French operation.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P23">To justify this new approach, successive French governments have, since the turn of the century, argued that Europe, because of its proximity to the continent, has key security concerns in Africa, arising from the threat of terrorism, international crime, migration pressures, weapons proliferation, instability and conflict. President Chirac (2002–07) made efforts to Europeanize military missions to Africa and his successor, Nicolas Sarkozy (2007–12), oversaw the `Europeanization’ of the RECAMP programme, which was renamed EURORECAMP in 2008 and placed under the European Council. This coincided with the EU developing its European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP), for which Africa rapidly emerged as a key theatre. As a result, during the Chirac and Sarkozy presidencies there were three French-inspired ESDP military missions on African soil: Operation Artemis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) from June to September 2003; EUFOR, also in the DRC, from July to November 2006; and EUFOR Chad/CAR, from January 2008 to March 2009 (Chafer and Cumming, 2010; Barrios, 2010). In addition, an EU naval operation, EU NAVFOR Operation Atalanta, was launched in December 2008, with France and the UK taking the lead, to fight piracy off the coast of Somalia. Following the Saint-Malo and Cahors (2001) Franco-British summits, the British and French Governments played a key role in gaining EU member states’ support for these missions. They also played a key role in the EU’s adoption, for the first time, of an Africa strategy in 2005.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P24">However, having been persuaded to take part in French-led military operations on the continent under the ESDP from 2003–09, some EU member states, in particular Germany, became sceptical about the value of direct EU military interventions in African crises. Wary of France seeking to implicate them in `its’ African problems, they preferred to leave military actions involving the deployment of combat troops to France, as it had troops on the ground and was clearly willing and able to intervene. As a result, there were no further deployments of combat troops from other EU member states to Africa after EUFOR Chad/CAR until Operation Takuba (see below) and France was forced to rethink its `Europeanization’ strategy for military intervention on the continent.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P25">The shift in French policy from a bilateral to a multilateral approach was not limited to the security field, but also extended to the field of development aid, with an increased proportion of French overseas development assistance (ODA) now channelled through multilateral organizations, in particular the EU. Thus, multilateral aid as a proportion of France’s total aid budget rose strongly in the first decade of the 21st century and by 2010 reached nearly 40% of the total aid budget, half of which was channelled via the EU (OECD, 2013). These percentages remained more or less stable during the 2010s, with 42% of its total aid budget of US&#160;$11,400m. being multilateral in 2017 (53% of which went to the EU) (Sénat, 2018). France also drew up a `Multilateral Aid Strategy 2017–2021’ in response to recommendations contained in the 2013 OECD Development Assistance Committee peer review of French ODA (OECD, 2018).</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P26">From the French perspective, the channelling of a significant proportion of its ODA through multilateral organizations has several advantages. It provides the opportunity for France to play a leading role in international debates on development. This enables French governments both to influence policy and leverage further resources from bilateral and multilateral donors in support of its policy priorities. It also means that France can exercise influence in countries and regions beyond the reach of its bilateral assistance. These advantages can be seen, for example, at the level of the EU where France, as the second largest contributor to the European Development Fund, has been able to promote convergence with its priority geographic areas for development assistance in sub-Saharan Africa and its priority sectors for intervention, such as health, education, climate change, gender equality and economic infrastructure (OECD, 2018).</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P27">These developments coincided with a wider trend in EU-Africa relations, which were moving away from an essentially `technical’ relationship between the EU and Africa. This had been managed since 1975 as part of the EU’s relationship with the African-Caribbean-Pacific (ACP) group of countries, which focused on trade and aid and in which the European Commission took the policy lead; however, following the first Africa-Europe summit in 2000 in Cairo, the EU-Africa relationship evolved into a much more wide-ranging, overtly political and security-focused relationship, for which the AU, rather than the ACP countries, would become the EU’s privileged interlocutor. Moreover, reflecting the EU’s ambition to play a greater role on the global stage as a foreign policy actor, the European Council now took the leading role in driving EU-Africa policy, a shift that was confirmed by the signature of the Africa-EU Strategic Partnership at the AU-EU summit in Lisbon in 2007. This shift towards intergovernmentalism at the level of the EU placed France, with its long history of involvement in the African continent, at the centre of EU policymaking on Africa. While this meant that the French Government had to consult more widely on Africa policy with its EU partners than it had done in the past, it also afforded France new opportunities to gain EU political and financial support for its African initiatives.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>`African Solutions to African Problems’: Forging a New Franco-African Security Partnership </heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P28">
      The African peace and security context has radically altered in recent years. The end of the Cold War and changing realities on the ground, such as the increased activism of the USA, China, India, the Russian Federation and other emerging powers on the continent, have placed limits on French interventionism. At the same time, the increased salience of security concerns on the continent post-`9/11’ has created new opportunities for France. Its position as a permanent member of the UN Security Council and one of the most influential member states of the EU, combined with its pre-positioned troops stationed at strategic locations and long experience of military action on the continent, have all provided `comparative advantage’ for France when it comes to responding to Africa’s security challenges. Thus, following a pause during the period of cohabitation between President Chirac and Prime Minister Jospin which ended in 2002
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.30.118233059897625" ref-symbol="6" />
      , there was a marked renewal of French military activism on the continent.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P29">The commitment to multilateralization and the language of partnership with Africa have been a constant of Africa policy under presidents Sarkozy, François Hollande and Emmanuel Macron. Like `Europeanization’, the forging of a new partnership with Africa to promote `African solutions to African problems’ is also about sharing the risks and costs of French military interventions on the continent. This means ensuring that any military intervention has received approval from the UN Security Council and been endorsed by the relevant African regional organization such as the AU or ECOWAS. It has also meant, as we have seen, a commitment to the reorientation of French military actions on the continent towards building African peacekeeping capacity, so that African forces are able to take greater responsibility for peace and security on the continent.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P30">In 2008 President Sarkozy gave a clear indication of France’s intention to move away from exclusive, bilateral defence relations with African countries towards a more multilateral approach when he acknowledged that the defence agreements France had signed with the governments of newly independent African states were no longer fit for purpose: `Their wording is obsolete. It is now unthinkable, for example, for us to be drawn into domestic conflicts’ (Sarkozy, 2008). Specifically, he proposed: first, that the agreements should be renegotiated through discussion with African governments in order to adapt them to `the realities of the present’; second, that, contrary to what had happened in the past, the new agreements must be based on transparency, with no secret clauses and with the French Parliament involved in the process; third, that the role of French forces should not be to intervene directly in African conflicts, but to help the AU achieve its aim of establishing the continent’s own collective security arrangements by building African peacekeeping capacity—this was a key aim of the RECAMP/EURORECAMP programme; and finally, in keeping with this objective, to make Europe a major partner for bringing about peace and security in Africa. The promise to renegotiate the agreements was carried out and the new texts were published. Yet, despite the commitment to multilateralism and a new partnership for African security that was supposed to reduce the need for direct intervention by French troops, French military interventions continued. Military interventions took place in Chad in support of President Idriss Deby Itno (2006, 2008 and 2019), in Côte d’Ivoire to remove President Laurent Gbagbo (2011) and in Libya, which resulted in the removal of Col Muammar al-Qaddafi (2011) from power. These were followed by further interventions in Mali and the CAR under President Hollande. Although he had previously promised not to deploy combat troops to these countries, Hollande launched Operation Serval in Mali in January 2013 and Operation Sangaris in the CAR in December of the same year. Subsequently, in 2014, the operation in Mali and the ongoing Operation Epervier (which had started in Chad in 1986 under the terms of the bilateral defence accord between the two countries) were consolidated into the Sahel-wide Operation Barkhane (see below).</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P31">Convinced by his military advisors that Islamists were on the point of taking over the country and that Mali was on the verge of becoming a fundamentalist Islamist state where drug trafficking and religious extremism could flourish, on 11 January 2013 President Hollande launched Operation Serval, involving the deployment of 4,000 French troops to the country, supported by 2,000 Chadians. The UN Security Council had passed three resolutions in 2011–12 identifying terrorism as one of the greatest threats to global peace and security and Resolution 2085 on Mali referred specifically to the threat of terrorist networks in the country. As a permanent member of the Security Council, with troops on the ground who had on many occasions demonstrated their capacity to intervene in African crises, and with France having played a key role in drawing international attention to the terrorist threat in the country, President Hollande decided that it was France’s responsibility to intervene. Moreover, key French allies, notably President Macky Sall of Senegal and President Mahamadou Issoufou of Niger, had appealed for French intervention, fearing that an Islamist takeover in Mali would have serious security implications for their countries.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P32">Operation Serval was a military success and very quickly chased the Islamists from the cities and main towns in the north of the country. It was terminated on 31 July 2014 and replaced by Operation Barkhane on 1 August. This new operation retained the troops involved in Operations Serval and Epervier, but its theatre of engagement now stretched across the whole of the francophone Sahara-Sahel region, spanning five countries (Mauritania, Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger and Chad—referred to as the `G5 Sahel’). It comprised 4,500 troops, some 200 armoured carriers, six fighter planes, 20 helicopters, 10 transport planes and several drones. Its stated aim was to support the armed forces of the participating countries in their interventions against armed terrorist groups across the Sahel and to help prevent the re-establishment of terrorist sanctuaries in the region. However, while the policy discourse regarding Barkhane was very much one of partnership with African forces, the reality was that the capacity to intervene of the armed forces of the G5 Sahel countries most affected by the violence (Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso) was limited without the support of French troops. Moreover, despite the deployment of Barkhane, the security situation across the region continued to deteriorate, with attacks by Islamist extremists spreading from the north of Mali to the centre of the country and to neighbouring countries. Thus, like its attempt to `Europeanize’ its military strategy in the early 2000s, the French plan to forge a new security partnership with African countries to enable them to take greater responsibility for their own security did not produce the hoped-for results.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Macron’s Africa Strategy</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P33">
      Like his predecessors, Sarkozy and Hollande, President Macron promised an end to 
      <i>Françafrique</i>
       and the establishment of a new partnership with Africa. Like them, he has also made regular official visits to Africa: his first, in May 2017 shortly after his election, was to French troops in Mali to reaffirm France’s commitment to Operation Barkhane. Underlining the continuity between his and Hollande’s presidency in the area of security policy, in his August 2017 address to French ambassadors he made it clear that his Government’s diplomatic priority was the struggle against terrorism and he paid tribute to President Hollande’s efforts to combat terrorism and prevent the Sahel becoming a sanctuary for terrorists. At the same time, faced with a deteriorating security situation in the Sahel, Macron was concerned that his predecessor had not put in place a credible exit strategy for Barkhane. He therefore promoted the idea of the G5 Sahel Joint Force and played a key role in lobbying the international community to provide financial support, which resulted in the EU and Saudi Arabia both pledging €100m., the United Arab Emirates €30m., and the USA, Japan and Norway also promising support, although there are question marks over how much of this money actually arrived.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P34">Despite these pledges and the creation of the G5 Sahel Joint Force in 2017, the ongoing deployment of UN forces, and the continuing presence of 4,500 Barkhane troops across the Sahel, the security situation continued to deteriorate. By 2019, particularly in central Mali and Burkina Faso, the violence had got much worse and the number of fatalities was constantly increasing. There was thus no realistic prospect that France would, in the short or medium term, be able to transfer responsibility for security in the region to the G5 Sahel Joint Force. At the same time there was no question of withdrawing French forces, as Macron had promised France’s allies in the G5 Sahel that it would stay until the jihadist groups were under control. However, it was clear that a new approach was needed. The areas to which the violence had spread were much more populous than northern Mali and the tactics of the armed groups had changed over the five years since Barkhane was launched. They increasingly sought to blend in with the local population and win them over, rather than hold territory, and they largely avoided open battles. They focused instead on roadside attacks on the UN Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) peacekeeping force and on killing, or threatening to kill, government officials in the areas of the country they controlled, in order to disrupt attempts to restore government services and reopen schools.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P35">With the violence escalating, Macron decided that the military effort needed to be temporarily strengthened. However, at the same time he was angered by the growing expressions of anti-French sentiment in the region, both on the streets of Bamako (Mali), Niamey (Niger) and Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso) and on social media, especially following the loss of the lives of 13 French troops when two helicopters of Operation Barkhane crashed on 25 November 2019. In response to these developments, he summoned the G5 Sahel leaders to a summit in Pau, France, at which he made it clear that he expected them to reaffirm their support for Operation Barkhane.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P36">The Pau summit was postponed, after an armed attack on the Nigerien military base at Inates on 10 December 2019 which resulted in the deaths of 71 Nigerien soldiers, and eventually took place on 13 January 2020. The way in which they were summoned to Pau by President Macron, demanding that they `clarify’ formally their support for France’s intervention, was experienced by G5 leaders as a summons and seen as disrespectful. Nevertheless, the summit went ahead, with the Nigerien Minister of Foreign Affairs proposing an increase in the military effort. The major new initiative announced at the summit was the creation of the international Coalition for the Sahel, which included the launch of Takuba, a European (but not EU) military task force composed of European special forces under the leadership of France. The Coalition has four pillars: the fight against armed terrorist groups; building the capacities of the armed forces of the region; supporting the return of the state and administrations and improving access to basic services; and assisting development. Takuba played a key role in the first of these pillars, where its role was to advise and accompany the Malian armed forces, in co-ordination with their G5 Sahel partners, in their fight against armed terrorist groups, with a particular focus on the tri-border area between Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso. The second pillar is essentially a fleshing out of the Partnership for Security and Stability in the Sahel (P3S), which was announced at the 2019 Biarritz Group of Seven (G7) summit with the aim to identify security needs and increase efforts in the fields of defence and internal security, while the third pillar represents an effort to identify the priority needs of the P3S and co-ordinate training and equipment assistance for national internal security forces (police, gendarmerie, national guard). The fourth pillar centres on the Sahel Alliance. Originally launched on 13 July 2017 by France, Germany and the EU, it aims to attract development assistance to the region and improve the effectiveness of aid by co-ordinating the actions of major development partners. Finally, Macron announced 600 extra troops for Operation Barkhane, bringing its total complement to 5,100.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P37">In August 2020 a military coup removed the Malian President, Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta, and he was replaced by a military-backed transitional government that subsequently opened negotiations with armed jihadist groups, something which the French Government had hitherto refused. This further complicated the political landscape and raised questions about previous claims of political progress within the country. Moreover, with French troop losses above 50, costs rising and facing a potentially difficult election in 2022, Macron was under growing pressure to bring forward an exit strategy after nearly eight years of military operations in the region. None the less, he drew back from announcing a widely predicted reduction in French troop numbers at the G5 Sahel summit in Chad on 15–16 February 2021, although the delay proved to be only temporary as, on 10 June 2021, in advance of the G7 summit in the UK, Macron announced the end of Operation Barkhane.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P38">Following this announcement, events on the ground moved quickly, obliging Macron to further rethink France’s Sahel strategy. Mali suffered a second military coup in May 2021, as the army sought to reassert control over the political transition, and in January 2022 a military coup toppled Burkinabè President Roch Marc Christian Kaboré. Also in January, the Malian Government expelled the French ambassador from the country and Danish troops, who had arrived in the country to join the Takuba task force, were told to leave. In the meantime, troops belonging to the Russian private security company, Wagner, arrived in the country in December 2021 and started undertaking military operations alongside the Malian military forces. The Malian Government then announced the country’s withdrawal from the G5 Sahel, accusing it of being under `foreign’ (for which read French) influence. Takuba closed down at the end of June 2022 and all French troops left the country by the end of August. In response to these developments, Macron’s plan was for a post-Barkhane lighter, more discreet, French military presence in the region, based in Niger, with some 2,500 French troops providing intelligence, equipment and training at the express request of African governments. However, this plan also proved to be ill-fated, as a military coup in Niger removed key Western ally President Mohamed Bazoum from power in July 2023. Following these military setbacks, Macron has launched a comprehensive rethink of France’s military presence in Africa, indicating that there would no longer be any purely French military bases in Africa (apart from Djibouti, which is presented as an Indo-Pacific, rather than an African, base), that the number of French troops on the continent would be reduced and that in future the bases would be `co-managed’ with host countries, although it is not yet clear exactly what this means in practice, nor what the timetable is for achieving it, not least because implementing it will require further revisions of the defence and military assistance agreements that France has with African governments. The situation was further complicated in August 2023 by a military coup in Gabon, traditionally one of France’s closest allies in Africa and host to one of the remaining French permanent military bases on the continent.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P39">Macron’s Africa policy is not limited to the security field, however. During his first term Macron launched initiatives to promote the French language and reinvigorate Francophonie. He sees Africa as key to the future of the French language and believes that there is the opportunity for French to become the third most spoken language in the world thanks to the continent’s rapid population growth. He has made a series of interventions to promote Francophonie on the continent, although these have not always been well received by African intellectuals, such as Alain Mabanckou, who view them as a renewed expression of French neocolonial ambitions on the continent (Mabanckou, 2018).</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P40">
      In his first major speech in Africa, in front of 800 students at Ouagadougou University (Burkina Faso) in November 2017, Macron not only restated the promise to put an end to 
      <i>Françafrique</i>
       but went further and paid homage to the country’s former President, Thomas Sankara, assassinated in 1987, who was a vigorous opponent and strong critic of France’s neocolonial policies and the 
      <i>Françafrique</i>
       networks that underpinned them. Pointing out that he, like them, was of a generation that had not known Africa under colonialism, Macron appealed directly to the youth of Africa as the future of the continent and, quoting Sankara, invited them to build `the future that you dare to invent’. To enable this, he promised to create an investment fund directed at young African entrepreneurs.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P41">
      Underlining his desire to renew Africa policy, Macron has sought to address the legacy of France’s colonial past in Africa by expressing his readiness to consider the restitution of artefacts looted or illegally taken out of Africa during the colonial period. He also became the first French President to visit the two major anglophone countries in West Africa, Ghana (November 2017) and Nigeria (July 2018). There was not only a political, but also an economic logic to this. France has long had difficult relations with Nigeria thanks to de Gaulle’s support for Biafran secession during the Nigerian civil war (1967–70), but it is the economic powerhouse of West Africa with a huge potential market, while Ghana has one of the strongest economies in the region. However, the visit had a wider significance, as it was also about sending out a message to African political leaders and civil society that France has changed and that it wants to create new partnerships with Africa beyond its traditional 
      <i>pré carré</i>
       through culture, sport and economic development. Significantly therefore, after visiting the capital Abuja and meeting President Muhammadu Buhari to discuss security, he travelled on to Lagos, where he visited the famous New Afrika Shrine nightclub, formerly run by the legendary Afrobeat musician Fela Kuti who was imprisoned during the 1970s and 1980s for his outspoken criticism of Nigerian military rule. As in Ouagadougou, Macron again appealed directly to African youth, to encourage them to get involved in politics: `Fela was not just a musician. He was a politician who wanted to change society’, Macron told the young audience from the stage. `So if I have one message for young people, it’s this: yes, politics is important; yes, be involved’. During his first term, Macron also visited Ethiopia and Kenya, also both outside France’s traditional African 
      <i>pré carré</i>
      .
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P42">
      In addition, there was a change of discourse, if not a fundamental change of approach, with regard to the CFA Franc zone. In December 2019, at a joint press conference in Abidjan, Macron and the Ivorian President, Alassane Ouattara, announced reforms to the West African CFA franc zone. For long criticized as a neocolonial construct—a relic of the 
      <i>Françafrique</i>
       era—the announced reform sought to address three of the most widely made criticisms of the zone. First, the name of the currency would change from the CFA franc, considered too redolent of its colonial origins, to the eco. Second, the requirement for member states to deposit 50% of their foreign reserves with the Bank of France would be ended. Third, French officials would be withdrawn from the central bank’s board, although some have suggested that the significance of this change should not be overestimated, as they will be replaced by a formal reporting mechanism that will allow the French Treasury to maintain its oversight of the zone’s finances. Other aspects remain unchanged: in particular, the fixed parity with the euro will be maintained and Paris will retain its role as guarantor of the currency for the eight member countries of the West African zone (the Union Economique et Monétaire Ouest-Africaine). It should also be noted that these reforms were to apply only to the eight countries using the CFA franc in the West African zone and not to the six in the Central African zone. The changes have not satisfied the zone’s increasingly vocal critics and even the name change will not happen any time soon, if at all. Eco was the name that ECOWAS had chosen in June 2019 for its planned single currency and Nigeria in particular was affronted that a group of francophone countries had, from its perspective, hijacked the plan for a West African single currency.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P43">
      Following his re-election as President in May 2022, Macron has sought to reset Africa policy. Yet, apart from the forced changes in military policy, much of the new Africa policy represents continuity with his first term. For example, he has promised to `relaunch a French economic presence in Africa’ and renewed his promise of support for youth employment and enterprise and to build new partnerships with African youth and civil society; 
      <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.30.118233059897567" ref-symbol="7" />
      . He has also pledged to work with European partners to finance infrastructure projects. His first visit to Africa after his re-election was also in keeping with the theme of change with continuity: in July 2022 he visited Cameroon, whose president, Paul Biya, has been in power for over 40 years and is a longstanding French ally; Benin, another francophone country that has been subject to a series of terrorist attacks from armed groups coming over the border from Burkina Faso; and Guinea-Bissau, a former Portuguese colony that is not part of the French 
      <i>pré carré</i>
       but at the time held the presidency of ECOWAS.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P44">In sum, under President Macron there has been a shift in both presidential style and policy discourse. There has been a renewed effort to extend French engagement beyond France’s traditional sphere of influence in francophone Africa, to enhance economic diplomacy and strengthen French `soft power’ on the continent. Macron has also been forced to undertake a further rethink of French military policy in Africa. However, his ambition to reset French Africa policy in order to maintain France’s geopolitical position as a pivotal actor in the region, through a combination of economic, military and cultural power and political activism, has collided with the reality of the decline of French influence and power in an increasingly competitive African policy environment. This, according to one recent book, is the `trap’ into which Macron’s Africa policy has fallen (Glaser and Airault, 2021).</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ML.IS.14416172041" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Conclusion</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P45">France has had to adapt its African policy to a new geopolitical context in which the USA as well as new external actors, such as China, India, Russia, Turkey and other Middle Eastern countries, have been stepping up their interest in the continent. Africa remains important for France as a privileged arena for the projection of French power overseas. This is partly a product of history: the centrality of Africa to France’s colonial empire, the nature of French decolonization in sub-Saharan Africa and the dense array of links that France has maintained with the region since political independence. These include the large number of French citizens and French dual nationals who live in Africa, particularly in francophone Africa; the French military presence and frequent military interventions on the continent; the density of its diplomatic presence; and the Franc Zone. France also has significant economic interests in West and Central Africa: petroleum (Gabon, the Republic of the Congo, Gulf of Guinea); uranium (Niger); trade in cocoa and coffee (Côte d’Ivoire); as well as banking, transport and other services (water, communications, telephony) throughout the region. In addition, African countries play a central role in the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie and are crucially important to the maintenance of French as a world language.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P46">Efforts have certainly been made to reconfigure France’s special relationship with Africa and there have been changes in approach and language. Thus, for example, the old-style unilateral military interventions, which were increasingly criticized from the 1990s both domestically and in Africa, were rejected in favour of a more multilateral approach. The move to `Europeanize’ its interventions in the early 2000s was designed primarily to reduce the financial costs and political risks of unilateral French operations. In the same vein, the language of humanitarianism and partnership with Africa, the importance attached to gaining the prior approval of African regional and international organizations for any proposed military intervention, and the stated commitment to working in partnership with African forces were a significant new departure.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.30.SGM.4998935.TEXT.REVISED.FOR.2024.P47">
      The profound changes in the international context since the end of the Cold War have had a significant impact on the nature of the Franco-African relationship. France does not have the leverage that it once had on the continent and the old-style 
      <i>Françafrique</i>
       networks are a thing of the past. However, because of its continuing geopolitical significance for France and given the common history and density of links between France and its former colonies in Africa, the Franco-African relationship remains in many respects a special one. It is also the case that, against the background of the emergence of Africa as a key focus, post-`9/11’, of international efforts to combat terrorism, fighting alongside allies to counter the spread of terrorism as part of the `global war on terror’ provided new opportunities and, for a time, a new legitimacy for French military actions on the continent (Chafer, 2016b, Ndiaye, 2014). Thanks to its position within the EU, its permanent seat on the UN Security Council, its long experience and knowledge of West and Central Africa, its pre-positioned troops stationed on the continent and its capacity to intervene militarily, France has been able to leverage both regional and international support for its initiatives in this part of Africa. However, this has not prevented a growing rejection of what many Africans see as French interference on the continent: its military presence, the maintenance of the CFA franc and the continuation of what are seen as paternalistic attitudes among its governing elites are particular bones of contention for francophone African intellectuals and many of the younger generation of Africans. The frequency of anti-French street demonstrations and of campaigns in the press and on social media in recent years suggest that France’s political leaders have some way to go if they are to convince Africans that they really do want to reset the country’s relationship with the continent and escape the accusations of neocolonialism.
    </p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Footnotes</heading>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.30.11823301148" ref-symbol="1">After de Gaulle’s resignation, Foccart subsequently also acted as adviser to presidents Georges Pompidou and Jacques Chirac.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.30.1182330595" ref-symbol="2">In French, `fric’ is slang for `cash’ or `money’.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.30.1182330596" ref-symbol="3">
       One of the many specificities of 
      <i>Françafrique</i>
       is that it has traditionally had a language of its own. These are two examples. 
      <i>Réseaux</i>
       (`networks’), thanks to its association with shadowy, sometimes illicit, activities, is another term that has specific connotations in this context.
    </endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.30.11823305967" ref-symbol="4"> The CFA franc is today pegged to the euro rather than the franc. 14 countries in West and Central Africa are members of the Franc Zone, which was created in 1945. Franc Zone countries were formerly required to deposit 50% of their foreign currency reserves with the Banque de France, but it was announced in December 2019 that this would no longer be the case for the West African zone.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.30.11823305989" ref-symbol="5">In 1997 French forces in Africa numbered some 8,000 soldiers in seven states: Cameroon, the CAR, Chad, Djibouti, Gabon, Côte d’Ivoire, and Senegal. By 2000 this had been reduced to 5,600 (Charbonneau, 2008), although it increased again following the launch of Operation Serval (2012), and then Barkhane (2014), to some 10,000.</endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.30.118233059897625" ref-symbol="6">
      Jospin described his policy as `
      <i>ni ingérence, ni indifférence</i>
      ’ (`neither interference, nor indifference’).
    </endnote>
          <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.30.118233059897567" ref-symbol="7">This was also the theme of the new-format Africa-France summit that took place in Montpellier, France, in October 2021, to which `actors of change’ (entrepreneurs, intellectuals, artists, sportspeople and influencers) were invited, but no African heads of state.</endnote>
     </gen-section>
     <bibl-section id="ASS.ESSAY.676765433767679" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="BIBL-REF">
          <heading>Bibliography</heading>
          <bibl-list>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Barrios, C. `France in Africa: from paternalism to pragmatism’, in 
        <i>Fride Policy Brief</i>
        , No. 58, 2010. www.files.ethz.ch/isn/130902/PB_58_Eng_France_in_Africa.pdf. Accessed 27 July 2020.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Bourmaud, D. `La politique africaine de Jacques Chirac: les anciens contre les modernes’, in 
        <i>Modern and Contemporary France </i>
        , 4(4), pp. 431–442, 1996.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Brunel, S. 
        <i>Le gaspillage de l’aide publique</i>
        . Paris, Seuil, 1993.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Chafer, T. `Chirac and “la Françafrique”: no longer a family affair’, in 
        <i>Modern and Contemporary France</i>
        , 13(1), pp. 7–23, 2005.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
        `The UK and France in West Africa: towards convergence?’, in 
        <i>African Security</i>
        , 6(3–4), pp. 234–256, 2013.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
        `French African policy in historical perspective’, in 
        <i>Readings in the International Relations of Africa</i>
        , Young, T., (Ed.), Bloomington, Indiana University Press, 2016a.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
        `France in Mali: towards a new Africa strategy’, in 
        <i>International Journal of Francophone Studies</i>
        , 19(2), pp. 119–141, 2016b.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Chafer, T., and Cumming, G. `Beyond Fashoda: Anglo-French security cooperation in Africa since St-Malo’, in 
        <i>International Affairs </i>
        , 86(5), pp. 1129–1147, 2010.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Charbonneau, B. 
        <i>France and the New Imperialism: Security Policy in Sub-Saharan Africa</i>
        . Aldershot, Ashgate, 2008.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
                    <i>The Dilemmas of International Intervention in Mali</i>
        . Montréal, Centre FrancoPaix, 2017.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Cumming, G. `French aid to Africa: a changing agenda?’, in 
        <i>France: From the Cold War to the New World Order</i>
        , Chafer, T., and Jenkins, B. (Eds), Basingstoke, Macmillan, 1996.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Glaser, A. and Airault, P. 
        <i>Le piège africain de Macron</i>
        . Paris, Fayard, 2021.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Gounin, Y. 
        <i>La France en Afrique: le combat des anciens et des modernes</i>
        . Brussels, De Boeck, 2009.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">G5 Sahel. `Conférence de presse des Chefs d’État à l’issue du Sommet de Pau’, 13 January 2020. www.elysee.fr/emmanuel-macron/2020/01/13/sommet-de-pau-declaration-conjointe-des-chefs-detat. Accessed 15 August 2022.</bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">Human Rights Watch. www.hrw.org/reports/1995/WR95/AFRICA-08.htm. Accessed 27 July 2020.</bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Kroslak, D. 
        <i>The Role of France in the Rwandan Genocide</i>
        . London, Hurst and Company, 2007.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        `La difficile évolution de l’approche française en Afrique’, 
        <i>Le Monde</i>
        , 29 July 2022.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Mabanckou, A. ’Francophonie, langue française: lettre ouverte à Emmanuel Macron’, 
        <i>L’Obs</i>
        , 15 January 2018.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        `Macron visits Fela Kuti-founded nightclub during Nigeria visit’, 
        <i>The Guardian</i>
        , 4 July 2018.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        N’Diaye, B. `Still “getting away with it”: France’s Africa defense and security policy’, in 
        <i>Routledge Handbook of African Security</i>
        , Hentz, J. (Ed.), Abingdon, Routledge, 2014.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 
        <i>Development Co-operation Peer Review: France 2013.</i>
         Paris, OECD, 2013.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="IMPLIED-AUTHOR">
                    <i>Development Co-operation Peer Review: France 2018</i>
        . Paris, OECD, 2018.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Pérouse de Montclos, M. `France’s fiasco in the Sahel’, 
        <i>Le Monde diplomatique</i>
        , October 2021.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">Sarkozy, N. `Discours de M. le Président de la République devant le Parlement Sud-Africain.’ 2008. www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/fr/IMG/pdf/PARLEMENT_AS.pdf. Accessed 27 August 2020.</bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Sénat. `Sur le système multilatéral de l’aide publique au développement’. 
        <i>Rapport d'information</i>
                    <i>n° 112</i>
        . Le Sénat, 2018.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Taylor, I. `France à fric: the CFA zone in Africa and neocolonialism’, in 
        <i>Third World Quarterly</i>
        , 40(6), pp. 1064–1088, 2019.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">United Nations. United Nations Stabilization Mission in Mali. peacekeeping.un.org/en/mission/minusma. Accessed 17 August 2021.</bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Vallin, V. `France as the Gendarme of Africa, 1960–2014’, in 
        <i>Political Science Quarterly</i>
        , 130(1), pp. 79–101, 2015.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        Verschave, F. 
        <i>La Françafrique: le plus long scandale de la République</i>
        . Paris, Stock, 1998.
      </bibl-entry>
               <bibl-entry type="FULL">
        `Why a celebrated Francophone Africa writer said no to president Macron’s Francophone project’, 
        <i>Quartz Africa</i>
        , 20 January 2018. qz.com/africa/1184735/frances-macron-turned-down-by-congo-writer-alain-mabanckou-for-francophone-project. Accessed 13 August 2021.
      </bibl-entry>
          </bibl-list>
     </bibl-section>
</essay>