<?xml version="1.0"?>
<essay id="ASS.ESSAY.5.1" id-root="ass.essay.5" iso="" original-filename="assiecol.rtf" region="ASS" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ESSAY-REF" usage="ass" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
     <heading>European Colonial Rule in Africa</heading>
     <alt-heading type="SECTION-LONG-UPPERCASE" usage="ass">General Survey</alt-heading>
     <alt-heading type="COUNTRY-SHORT-TITLECASE" usage="ass">European Colonial Rule in Africa</alt-heading>
     <author-group>
          <primary-authors>
               <person-name>
                    <forename>Richard</forename>
                    <surname>Brown</surname>
               </person-name>
          </primary-authors>
     </author-group>
     <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.3">The colonial era in Africa began with the continent’s hectic partition by the European powers in the final quarter of the 19th century. It ended in circumstances of equal haste less than a century later, leaving the present states of Africa as its political legacy. However, Europe had been in direct contact with sub-Saharan Africa from the mid-15th century, following the Portuguese maritime explorations. Commercial contacts gradually became dominated by the massive and destructive trade in slaves carried on by the Portuguese, Dutch, French, British and others. In all, some 14m. Africans are estimated to have been transported to the Caribbean and the Americas or to have lost their lives as a result of the trade. Colonizing efforts were few before the 19th century, but Portugal maintained a token presence in the areas that much later were extended to become Angola and Mozambique, while the Dutch initiated European settlement from Cape Town in 1652. Elsewhere the prolonged trade contacts generated only scattered European footholds along the African coasts.</p>
     <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.4">The United Kingdom was the leading trafficker in slaves in the 18th century, but after 1807, when British subjects were prohibited from further participation in the slave trade, a new era began. The subsequent campaign against the slave trade of other nations; the search for new trade products such as palm oil; the onset of geographical exploration; the outburst of Christian missionary zeal; improved communications (the telegraph and steamships); growing knowledge of tropical medicine; and Europe’s new industrial might all combined to make Africa increasingly vulnerable to European colonial encroachment. The discovery of diamonds in southern Africa in 1867, and the opening of the Suez Canal two years later, further focused attention on the continent. Even before the main scramble for colonies began in the 1870s, the UK and France had been steadily increasing their commercial and political involvement in Africa.</p>
     <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.5">The UK established a settlement at Freetown (Sierra Leone) as a base for freed slaves from 1808, and subsequently engaged in a series of conflicts with inland Ashanti from its outposts on the Gold Coast (Ghana), while steadily increasing its influence in the Niger delta region, in Zanzibar, and in southern Africa. In the mid-1800s Gen. Louis Faidherbe began France’s expansion into the West African interior along the River Senegal from its long-held trading settlements at the river’s mouth. Simultan­eously, the interests of both countries grew in Madagascar, but it was France that later annexed the island (1896). During this period of colonial expansion France extended its penetration of West Africa from existing bases in the interior, as well as from enclaves on the coast. It created, too, a second colonial fiefdom in Equatorial Africa, with its administrative base in Libreville, on the Gabonese coast. The result of this strategy was the emergence of two large French colonial federations: Afrique Occidentale Française (AOF, 1895) eventually included Senegal, Upper Volta (Burkina Faso), Soudan (Mali), Dahomey (Benin), Guinea, Niger, Mauritania and Côte d’Ivoire; Afrique Equatoriale Française (AEF, 1910) comprised Gabon, Middle Congo (Republic of the Congo), Oubangui Chari (Central African Republic) and Chad. Meanwhile, in West Africa, the UK extended its foothold on the Gambian coast into a protectorate, enlarged its territorial holdings in Sierra Leone, created the Gold Coast Colony (1874, later conquering Ashanti and adding territory to the north as the scramble proceeded), and sanctioned the advance of the Royal Niger Co into the heavily populated region that subsequently, as Nigeria, became the UK’s most important African colony.</p>
     <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.6">The quest for colonies gained momentum as other European powers entered the field. The first of these was Belgium, whose ambitious monarch, Leopold II, created the International Association for the Exploration and Civilization of Central Africa (1876) as a means of establishing and administering a vast personal empire in the Congo basin, which in 1885 was ironic­ally designated the Congo Free State. The Association’s in­fam­ous regime of exploitation led to international outrage and eventually, in 1908, to the transfer of the territory to the Belgian state. Another late participant in the drive to colonize Africa was Germany, which had newly emerged as a major industrial power. In 1884 its Chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, declared German protectorates over Togoland, Kamerun and South West Africa (Namibia). Bismarck then moved swiftly to organize the Berlin West Africa Conference (1884–85), which created a generally agreed framework for colonial expansion in order to avert any major conflict among the European powers. Shortly afterwards Bismarck added German East Africa (Tanganyika, the mainland of modern Tanzania) to Germany’s colonial possessions. (After the German defeat in the First World War, the administration of these territories passed to the victors as League of Nations mandates. South Africa obtained Namibia, Tanganyika was awarded to the UK, and Ruanda-Urundi to Belgium, while Kamerun and Togoland were each partitioned between the UK and France.)</p>
     <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.7">
    Although the UK, as the leading European economic power, would have preferred to adhere to its traditionally gradual method of empire building, it emerged from the scramble as the dominant colonial power, both in terms of territory and popu­lation. Apart from its West African possessions, the UK acquired substantial territorial holdings in eastern and southern Africa. The largest of these was the Sudan, a consequence of British involvement in Egypt and the importance attached to the Suez Canal. Egypt had been employing British soldier-administrators in its efforts to gain control of the Sudan, but in 1881 a Muslim cleric proclaimed himself the Mahdi (supreme spiritual leader) and declared a 
    <i>jihad</i>
     (holy war). In 1885 the Mahdi’s forces captured Khartoum, killing Gen. Charles Gordon and causing outrage in the UK. The Mahdist state was destroyed by Anglo-Egyptian forces led by Gen. Horatio Kitchener in 1898, just in time to forestall a parallel French expedition at Fashoda. The Sudan officially became an Anglo-Egyptian condominium, but was in effect administered as a British colony, which became highly valued for its cotton production. Fertile Uganda, supposedly a key to control of the Nile valley, had been made a protectorate in 1894, and neighbouring Kenya (as British East Africa) was added by the UK the following year in order to secure access to the sea. The offshore island of Zanzibar, long a focus of British interest and commercially significant for its cloves, was formally declared a protectorate in 1890. Further to the south, missionaries played an important part in the British acquisition of the landlocked Nyasaland protectorate (Malawi) in 1891.
  </p>
     <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.8">In the extreme south the UK had obtained the Cape Colony by treaty at the end of the Napoleonic Wars (1814), and soon found itself in conflict both with its white settlers of mainly Dutch origin (Afrikaners, or Boers), as well as with the area’s many indigenous kingdoms and chieftaincies. In 1843 the British coastal colony of Natal was founded, principally as a means of containing the Afrikaners in the interior, where they established the Orange Free State and Transvaal republics. Fatefully, these developments coincided with the discoveries of immense reserves of diamonds (1867) and gold (1886). The ensuing upheavals and an insatiable demand for `cheap native labour’ brought about the final conquest of the African peoples (most notably in the Zulu War, 1879). Acting on behalf of the UK, the mining magnate Cecil Rhodes organized from the Cape the further northward conquest and occupation of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) and Northern Rhodesia (Zambia), beginning in 1890: in 1884 Rhodes had been instrumental in the British acquisition of Bechuanaland (Botswana) as a protectorate, to safeguard the land route from the Cape into the interior, which had been threatened by German activity in South West Africa. The UK had also obtained Basutoland (Lesotho) in 1868, and formally established a protectorate over Swaziland in 1903. However, British claims to paramountcy throughout southern Africa were challenged by the two Afrikaner republics in the Boer War (1899–1902). The UK overcame the republics only with great difficulty, and then left the Afrikaners, who formed the main element of the privileged white minority, in political control of a newly fashioned Union of South Africa, which was then granted virtual independence (1910). Known as the high commission territories, Bechuanaland, Basutoland and Swaziland, however, remained under British rule. Subsequent South African ambitions to annex them were thwarted, and they eventually proceeded to independence in the 1960s.</p>
     <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.9">Despite its economic weakness relative to the other Euro­pean powers, Portugal obtained a major share of the colonial division of southern Africa. British diplomatic support helped Portugal to secure the vast colonies of Angola (including Portuguese Congo, later known as Cabinda) and Mozambique; in West Africa Portugal had long been in control of mainland (Portuguese) Guinea (now Guinea-Bissau), the Cabo Verde archi­pel­ago and the islands of São Tomé and Príncipe. Spain, meanwhile, acquired the islands of Fernando Póo (Bioko) and Annobón (Pagalu), together with the mainland enclave of Río Muni, which now form the Republic of Equatorial Guinea.</p>
     <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.10">Some African polities themselves participated in the scramble: the kingdoms of Buganda and Ethiopia both seized opportunities to expand. Indeed, Ethiopia successfully defended itself against Italian aggression by winning a famous victory at the battle of Adowa (1896). Italy had to content itself with Eritrea and the major part of Somalia, until Mussolini’s armies overran Ethiopia in 1935. (Italian occupation was ended by an Anglo-Ethiopian military expedition in 1941.) Eritrea, however, was not to emerge as an independent state until 1993. Liberia, a US-inspired republic founded in 1847 and politically dominated by descendants of former slaves, remained nominally independent throughout the colonial era, but in practice became an economic dependency of US rubber growing ­interests.</p>
     <gen-section id="ASS.ESSAY.5.11" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Colonial Rule</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.12">There was much resistance to the European intrusion by many of the Islamized, as well as the indigenous, cultures of West Africa. There were also major rebellions against the Germans in South West Africa and Tanganyika, and against the British in Southern Rhodesia; however, divisions within and between African ethnic groups, superior European weaponry and the widespread use of African troops enabled the colonial powers generally to secure control of their territorial acquisitions without great difficulty (although military operations continued in some areas until the 1920s). Boundaries were, in the main, effectively settled by 1900 or soon afterwards. Most colonies enclosed a varied assortment of societies, but many African groupings found themselves divided by the new frontiers (the Somali, for example, were split among British, French, Italian and Ethiopian administrations). Although in the long run colonialism did much to undermine previous patterns of life, its administrative policies and the development of written languages (mainly by missionaries) fostered ethnic identity, helping to replace pre-colonial cultural and political fluidity by modern tribalism. African reactions to colonialism also contributed to the growing sense of ethnic self-awareness. At the same time, members of the Western-educated indigenous élites were also exploring alternative identities based on the colonial territory (nationalism) or, indeed, on the broader concept of Pan-Africanism.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.13">As military control gave way to civil administration, economic issues came to the fore. In the early decades of colonial rule a considerable amount of railway construction was carried out, and there was a marked development of the export-orientated economy. Colonial taxation was an important stimulus to peasant production and to wage-labour, but in the early period all colonies conscripted labour by force. In the more primitive and undeveloped colonies (as in the Portuguese territories) coercion of labour persisted into the 1960s. In much of West Africa and parts of East Africa export production remained mainly in indigenous hands. Elsewhere, concessionary companies (as in the Belgian Congo and AEF) or white settlers (as in South Africa and Southern Rhodesia) were the major agricultural producers. White settlers, whose interests were almost invariably given priority, were also a significant force in Kenya, as well as in Northern Rhodesia, the Belgian Congo, Angola, Mozambique, Kamerun and Côte d’Ivoire. Mining was a dominant force in a number of areas. In South Africa it provided the main impetus to the development of a strong industrial base by the late 1930s. Southern Rhodesia followed a similar pattern, although on a smaller scale. The important copper mines of the Belgian Congo (subsequently known as Zaire and now the Democratic Republic of the Congo) were later (in the 1920s) joined by those of Northern Rhodesia. Tin in Nigeria, gold in the Gold Coast and, later, diamonds and uranium in Namibia augmented the primary agricultural exports of these territories. Overall, the growth of a money economy did most to change African life, as different areas developed new production, supplied labour, stagnated, or developed the towns that were essential to the conduct of trade and, in the late colonial period, to the growth of manufacturing in some areas additional to that already established in South Africa.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.14">Where settlers monopolized land and resources, colonialism tended to bear harshly on traditional African life. Elsewhere, however, the direct European impact was more muted. The very small number of European colonial officials in non-settler colonies necessitated reliance on African intermediaries to sustain rule. Such administrations had to limit their interventions in African life and rely on traditional and created chiefs to carry out day-to-day administration (often in arbitrary and non-traditional ways), although military power was never far away in the event of any breakdown in control. By the 1920s air power could be used to transport troops quickly to suppress uprisings. The British, in particular, favoured the policy of `indirect rule’, bolstering traditional authorities as subordinate allies, but often with new powers and resources unavailable to their predecessors. The British colonial doctrine emphasized the separateness of its colonies from the imperial power and theoretically envisaged eventual political independence. Some degree of freedom of expression was allowed (many African newspapers flourished in British West Africa), and a limited political outlet for a circumscribed few was eventually provided through the establishment of legislative councils. In contrast, the French doctrine of assimilation theoretically envisaged Africans as citizens of a greater France, but little was done to make this a reality until after the Second World War. These contrasting British and French principles were not without influence on policy, for example in the educational sphere, and they also helped to shape the later patterns of decolonization and post-colonial relationships. Whatever the theory, all colonial regimes were deeply influenced by the racist outlook that had taken hold of the European mind in the 19th century and in practice treated their colonial subjects as inferior beings.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.15">Racial discrimination was deeply resented by the Western-educated élites. In coastal West Africa and in South Africa the existence of these élites actually pre-dated the scramble, and soon lawyers, clergy, teachers and merchants founded moderate protest associations, such as the Aborigines’ Protection Society (1897) in the Gold Coast and the Native National Congress (1912), later the African National Congress, in South Africa. By the 1920s clerks and traders in Tanganyika were able to form an African Association on a territory-wide basis. In other social strata religious associations were often the chief vehicles for African assertion. These could be traditional, Christian, Islamic or syncretic in inspiration, and often aroused mass enthusiasm, to the concern of the colonial authorities. Occasionally there were violent clashes. In 1915 Rev. John Chilembwe led an armed uprising, protesting at the recruitment of Africans for service in the First World War and at conditions for tenants on European-owned estates in Nyasaland. Worker protest appeared early in towns, and on the railways and in mines. Rural protest was often about taxation (as in the 1929 riots by women in Eastern Nigeria) or commodity prices (as in the Gold Coast cocoa boycotts of the 1930s). Yet, whatever the level of discontent, prior to the Second World War the colonial grip remained unshaken.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.16">Any complacency about the underlying state of colonial Africa had, however, already been shattered by the world economic depression beginning in 1929–30. The effects of the collapse of prices were so severe that the major European powers, the UK, France and Belgium, began to perceive the need to provide development funds and to improve social welfare and education in their colonies, if Africa’s ability to export tropical products and to import finished goods was to be sustained. These ideas, however, only began to make themselves strongly felt after the Second World War, when they were to add to the ferment of change then gathering force throughout the continent.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.ESSAY.5.17" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Decolonization</heading>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.18">Events inside and outside Africa interacted to produce the surge towards independence after 1945. The Second World War itself provided the immediate context. The war greatly weakened the colonial powers, and brought to the fore the USA, which opposed European colonial control of Africa. African troops were enrolled to fight in Asia and the Mediterranean, returning with a deep resentment at post-war conditions and the continuing colonial subordination. The victory over fascism and the enunciation of the Atlantic Charter also encouraged thoughts of liberation within the continent. Economic change intensified as both the war and its aftermath stimulated demand, and there was a surge of African migration to the towns. Economic and social grievances multiplied, especially in relation to the inadequacy of urban facilities and lack of educational opportunities. Among peasant farmers, prices, marketing arrangements and new levels of bureaucratic interference aroused intense resentment. Owing to labour migration, links between town and country were close and provided opportunities for newly militant nationalist parties in the more developed colonies, such as the Gold Coast and Côte d’Ivoire, to put pressure on the colonial authorities. For the democratic European powers the increasing African discontent raised both the moral and material costs of maintaining colonial rule. In any case, with the exception of Portugal, political control was no longer regarded as essential to the safeguarding of economic interests, particularly as cap­italism was becoming increasingly internationalized and the concept of possessing colonies was beginning to appear outmoded.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.19">
      In French Africa the Second World War helped directly to set in train events that were ultimately to lead to independence. Following the German defeat of France in 1940, AEF repudiated the Vichy Government and declared its support for the `Free French’ under Gen. Charles de Gaulle. The Brazzaville Conference convened by de Gaulle in 1944 spoke in general terms of a new deal for Africans, while the new French Constitution adopted in 1946 provided for direct African elections to the French Assemblée Nationale. Political parties established themselves throughout francophone Africa, although their demands were for fuller rights of citizenship within the French state rather than for independence. Attempts by the French Government to thwart African political progress altogether were unsuccessful. The 1956 
      <i>loi cadre</i>
       (enabling law) introduced universal adult suffrage, but, to the dismay of many nationalist polit­icians, the franchise was applied individually to the separate states of the two federations, so that the structures of AOF and AEF were allowed to wither away. In 1958 de Gaulle, still attempting to salvage something of the greater France concept, organized a referendum in which only Guinea voted for full independence. By 1960, however, the remaining AOF and AEF territories, as well as Madagascar, had insisted upon receiving 
      <i>de jure</i>
       independence, even if, despite outward appearances, they remained tied economically and militarily to France.
    </p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.20">The events that ended the French empire in sub-Saharan Africa were hastened by concurrent developments in neighbouring British colonies, especially the Gold Coast. With no settler communities to placate, decolonization in British West Africa proceeded relatively smoothly, although much more rapidly than had been contemplated. Popular grievances gave a new edge to the political demands of the now sizeable educated middle classes, and the UK’s cautious post-war moves towards granting internal self-government were soon perceived as inadequate even by the British themselves. When police fired on an ex-serviceman’s peaceful demonstration in Accra (Gold Coast) in 1948, the resulting unrest, strikes and rural agitation led to major policy changes. Sensing the new mood, the militant nationalist Kwame Nkrumah formed the Convention People’s Party (CPP) in 1949 with the slogan `self-government now’. Its populist appeal enabled it, in 1951, to overcome the more moderate United Gold Coast Convention party (of which Nkrumah had earlier been General Secretary) in an election based on a new and more democratic Constitution. Although in gaol for sedition, Nkrumah was released and invited to become head of an independent Government. This dramatic development, followed by the granting of independence in 1957 as Ghana (whose boundaries also took in the former mandated territory of British Togoland), had repercussions throughout black Africa. (In fact, the Sudan had achieved independence in the previous year, when the Anglo-Egyptian condominium was brought to an end, but this had attracted little outside attention.) Nkrumah sought, with some success, to intensify African revolutionary sentiment still further by organizing an African Peoples’ Conference in Accra in 1958. Nigeria’s progress towards independence, meanwhile, was complicated by its enormous size and colonially imposed regional structure. Rival regional and ethnic nationalisms competed, and no one party could achieve the degree of overall dominance enjoyed by the CPP in the Gold Coast. None the less, a federal Nigeria became independent in 1960, followed by Sierra Leone (1961) and The Gambia (1965).</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.21">Belgium initially remained aloof from the movement towards decolonization. It appeared to believe that its relatively advanced provision for social welfare and the rapid post-war economic growth in the Belgian Congo would enable it to avoid making political concessions and to maintain the authoritarian style of government that had characterized its administration of the territory since it took over from the Belgian King. The Belgian Congo, however, could not be insulated—any more than any other part of Africa—from the anti-colonial influences at work throughout the continent. From 1955 onwards nationalist feeling spread rapidly, despite the difficulties in building effective national parties in such a huge country. Urban riots in 1959 led to a precipitate reversal in Belgian policy: at the Brussels Round Table Conference in January 1960 it was abruptly decided that independence was to follow in only six months. Not surprisingly, the disintegration of political unity and order in the country speedily followed the termination of Belgian administration. Belgian rule in the mandated territory of Ruanda-Urundi ended in 1962, and was followed by its division into the separate countries of Rwanda and Burundi.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.22">Meanwhile, in eastern and southern Africa, the UK was also encountering difficulties in implementing decolonization. In Uganda, where its authority rested to a large extent on an alliance with the kingdom of Buganda, British policies had tended to stratify existing ethnic divisions. The deeply ingrained internal problems that preceded independence in 1962 continued to beset Uganda for the next 25 years. In contrast, however, the nationalist movement led by Julius Nyerere in Tanganyika was exceptionally united, and there was little friction prior to independence in 1961. Three years later Tanganyika united with Zanzibar (which obtained independence in 1963) as Tanzania. In Kenya, as in other colonies with significant settler minorities, the process of decolonization was troubled. During the post-war period the settlers of Kenya sought political domination and worked to suppress emergent African nationalism. African frustrations, particularly about access to land among the Kikuyu, and growing unrest among the urban poor, led in 1952 to the declaration of a state of emergency and the violent revolt the British knew as `Mau Mau’. This was fiercely suppressed, but only with the help of troops from the UK, a factor that helped finally to destroy the settlers’ political credibility. Kenya eventually achieved independence in 1963 under the leadership of the veteran nationalist, Jomo Kenyatta. Vilified by the settlers in the 1950s as a personifi­cation of evil, Kenyatta, firstly as Prime Minister and subsequently as President, in fact strove to protect the economic role of the settler population and to maintain good relations with the UK.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.23">Settler interests were more obstructive further to the south. The whites of Southern Rhodesia had obtained internal self-government as early as 1923, but in 1953 the colony was allowed by the UK to become the dominant partner in a federation with Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Conflict followed with African nationalists in the two northern territories, and the federation eventually collapsed in 1963, when the UK had to concede that its policy of decolonization could only effectively apply to the two northern territories whose Governments it still controlled. In 1964 Nyasaland became independent as Malawi and Northern Rhodesia as Zambia. When the UK then refused white-minority rule independence to Southern Rhodesia, its settler-dominated Government, led by Ian Smith, unilaterally declared independence (1965). This was resisted by the UK and condemned by the United Nations (UN), but an ineffectual campaign of economic sanctions was defeated by support for the Smith regime from neighbouring South Africa and Portugal. African nationalists eventually succeeded in organizing the guerrilla war that, in the 1970s, paved the way for a negotiated settlement. With Robert Mugabe as its leader, the country became independent as Zimbabwe (1980), a development that owed much to the collapse of Portuguese rule in Africa after 1974.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.24">During the lengthy dictatorship of Dr António de Oliveira Salazar Portugal regarded its African colonial possessions as inalienable, and in 1951 they were declared to be overseas provinces. However, intense political repression failed to prevent the emergence of armed resistance movements in Angola (1961), Guinea-Bissau (1963) and Mozambique (1964). Most successfully in Guinea-Bissau, under the leadership of Amílcar Cabral, these guerrilla movements succeeded in mobilizing rural support. Eventually, in 1974, following the military overthrow of the Portuguese regime, progress towards internal democratization was accompanied by a determination to implement an accelerated policy of decolonization. In Angola, where the divided nationalist movement provided opportunities for external intervention on opposite sides by South African and Cuban forces, independence proved difficult to consolidate. Mozambique also suffered greatly from South Africa’s policy of destabilizing its newly independent ­neighbours.</p>
          <p id="ASS.ESSAY.5.25">During this period South Africa was itself conducting a colonial war in Namibia, which it continued to occupy in defiance of the UN after it had terminated the mandate in 1966. The war against the South West African People’s Organization of Namibia continued until a negotiated settlement finally led to independence in 1990, effectively concluding the colonial era in Africa.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section id="ASS.ESSAY.5.26" print-style="PGWIDTH" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Dates of Independence of African Countries</heading>
          <heading-note>In Chronological Order of Independence—Post-War</heading-note>
          <table-block-simple id="ASS.ESSAY.5.27" type="OTHER">
               <table pgwide="YES" style="WITHOUT-RULES">
                    <tgroup cols="5">
                         <colspec colwidth="15cm" />
                         <colspec colwidth="7cm" />
                         <colspec colwidth="2cm" />
                         <colspec colwidth="15cm" />
                         <colspec colwidth="5cm" />
                         <tbody>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Libya</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">24 Dec. 1951</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Burundi</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">1 July 1962</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Sudan</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">1 Jan. 1956</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Algeria</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">3 July 1962</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Morocco</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2 March 1956</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Uganda</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">9 Oct. 1962</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Tunisia</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">20 March 1956</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Zanzibar (now part of Tanzania)</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">10 Dec. 1963</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Ghana</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">6 March 1957</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Kenya</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">12 Dec. 1963</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Guinea</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">2 Oct. 1958</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Malawi</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">6 July 1964</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Cameroon</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">1 Jan. 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Zambia</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">24 Oct. 1964</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Togo</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">27 April 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">The Gambia</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">18 Feb. 1965</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Mali</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">20 June 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Botswana</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">30 Sept. 1966</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Senegal</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">20 June 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Lesotho</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">4 Oct. 1966</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Madagascar</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">26 June 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Mauritius</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">12 March 1968</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">The Democratic Republic of the Congo (as the Congo)</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">30 June 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Swaziland</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">6 Sept. 1968</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Somalia</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">1 July 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Equatorial Guinea</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">12 Oct. 1968</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Benin (as Dahomey)</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">1 Aug. 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Guinea-Bissau</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">10 Sept. 1974</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Niger</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">3 Aug. 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Mozambique</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">25 June 1975</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Burkina Faso (as Upper Volta)</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">5 Aug. 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Cabo Verde</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">5 July 1975</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Côte d’Ivoire</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">7 Aug. 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">The Comoros</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">
                6 July 1975
                <endnoteref idref="ASS.ESSAY.5.28" ref-symbol="*" />
                                   </entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Chad</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">11 Aug. 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">São Tomé and Príncipe</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">12 July 1975</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">The Central African Republic</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">13 Aug. 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Angola</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">11 Nov. 1975</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">The Republic of the Congo (Congo-Brazzaville)</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">15 Aug. 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Seychelles</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">29 June 1976</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Gabon</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">17 Aug. 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Djibouti</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">27 June 1977</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Nigeria</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">1 Oct. 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Zimbabwe</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">18 April 1980</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Mauritania</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">28 Nov. 1960</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Namibia</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">21 March 1990</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Sierra Leone</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">27 April 1961</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Eritrea</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">24 May 1993</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Tanzania (as Tanganyika)</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">9 Dec. 1961</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">South Sudan</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">9 July 2011</entry>
                              </row>
                              <row>
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER">Rwanda</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER">1 July 1962</entry>
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                                   <entry align="right" style="NO-DOT-LEADER" />
                              </row>
                         </tbody>
                    </tgroup>
               </table>
               <endnote id="ASS.ESSAY.5.28" ref-symbol="*">Date of unilateral declaration of independence, recognized by France (in respect of three of the four islands) in December 1975</endnote>
          </table-block-simple>
     </gen-section>
</essay>