<int-org-entryref id="SL1115886" int-org-entrydtd="-//Semantico//DTD SGML EWYB document 1.0//EN" sllink="SLSDOCRF" sllinkid="1115885" slsdocid="1101623" slsdocty="int-org-entry int-org-entrydtd" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
               
               <int-org-entry id="SL1101631" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="" print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-ENTRYREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                    <int-org-entry-head>
                         <int-org-name-group type="MAIN">
                              <org-entry-name>Council of the European Union</org-entry-name>
                         </int-org-name-group>
                    </int-org-entry-head>
                    <int-org-block>
                         <address-block>
                              <address type="POSTAL">
                                   <verbatim-address>Justus Lipsius Bldg, 175 rue de la Loi, 1048 Brussels, Belgium</verbatim-address>
                              </address>
                              <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 281-61-11</telephone>
                              <fax>(2) 281-69-34</fax>
                              <email>press.office@consilium.europa.eu</email>
                              <internet>www.consilium.europa.eu</internet>
                         </address-block>
                         <p id="WB02047.IO.TXT.68" usage="ewyb edio casee">
            The Council of the European Union, often referred to simply as the Council, was, until November 1993, known formally as the Council of Ministers of the European Communities (and is still sometimes referred to informally as the Council of Ministers). The Council is the only institution that directly represents the member states. It is the EU’s principal decision-making body, acting, as a rule, on proposals made by the Commission, and has five main responsibilities: to approve EU legislation (in many fields it legislates jointly with the European Parliament—EP); to co-ordinate the broad policy of the member states in specific areas, such as economic and fiscal policy, employment, and education, culture, youth and sport; to conclude international agreements between the EU and one or more states or international organizations; to develop the EU’s foreign and security policy, on the basis of guidelines drawn up by the European Council; and to adopt the EU budget (together with the EP). The Council is composed of representatives of the member states, each Government delegating to it one of its members, according to the subject to be discussed (the Council has 10 different configurations). These meetings are generally referred to as the Agriculture and Fisheries Council, the Transport, Telecommunications and Energy Council, etc. The General Affairs and Foreign Affairs Council, the Economic and Financial Affairs Council and the Agriculture and Fisheries Council each normally meet once a month. The Eurogroup is an informal grouping of ministers of finance of the 20 eurozone member states; it is led, since July 2020, by Irish Minister of Finance Paschal Donohoe, elected for a term of 2.5 years. Donohoe began a second term in January 2023. The Eurogroup meets once a month, typically the day before the meeting of the Economic and Financial Affairs Council. The Presidency is exercised for a term of six months by each member of the Council in rotation. A new, fixed 18-month trio system (groups of three presidencies) was introduced under the Treaty of Lisbon, which entered into force on 1 December 2009. Following Croatia’s admission to the EU in 2013 and a referendum vote in mid-2016 in favour of the UK’s departure from the EU, in July 2016 the Council agreed a new, draft trio system. The trio shares the presidencies of most configurations of the Council, with the aim of facilitating overall co-ordination and continuity of work. The current Presidency Trio comprises Belgium (January–June 2024) and Hungary (July–December 2024), Spain having presided in July–December 2023.
            
                         </p>
                         <p id="WB02047.IO.TXT.69" usage="ewyb edio casee">The Treaty of Rome prescribed three types of voting (depending on the issue under discussion): simple majority; qualified majority; and unanimity. Amendments to the Treaty of Rome (the Single European Act), effective from July 1987, restricted the right of veto and allowed proposals relating to the dismantling of barriers to the free movement of goods, persons, services and capital to be approved by a majority vote in the Council, rather than by a unanimous vote. Unanimity was still required for certain areas, including harmonization of indirect taxes, legislation on health and safety, veterinary controls and environmental protection; individual states retained control over immigration rules and the prevention of terrorism and of drug trafficking. The Treaty of Amsterdam, which came into force on 1 May 1999, extended the use of qualified majority voting (QMV) to a number of areas previously subject to unanimous decision. Under the terms of the Treaty of Nice, which came into force on 1 February 2003, a further range of areas that had previously been subject to national vetoes became subject to QMV. With the expansion of the EU to 25 members in 2004 (and subsequently to 27 members in 2007 and to 28 members in 2013–20, until the departure of the UK in January 2020), and the consequent reduced likelihood of unanimity in Council decisions, the use of QMV in a broader range of decisions was intended to minimize so-called policy drag. The 2009 Lisbon Treaty provided for the further extension of QMV, which was newly defined, to areas that had previously been subject to national vetoes (from 2014, see below).</p>
                         <p id="WB02047.IO.TXT.70" usage="ewyb edio casee">The Single European Act introduced a `co-operation procedure’ whereby a proposal adopted by a qualified majority in the Council had to be submitted to the EP for approval: if the Parliament were to reject the Council’s common position, unanimity was required for the Council to act on a second reading and, if the Parliament suggested amendments, the Commission was required to re-examine the proposal and forward it to the Council again. A `co-decision procedure’ was introduced in 1993 by the Treaty on European Union. The procedure allowed a proposal to be submitted for a third reading by a so-called Conciliation Committee, composed equally of Council representatives and members of the EP. The Treaty of Amsterdam simplified the co-decision procedure, and extended it to matters previously resolved under the co-operation procedure, although the latter remained in place for matters concerning economic and monetary union.</p>
                         <p id="WB02047.IO.TXT.72" usage="ewyb edio casee">The Treaty of Nice addressed institutional issues that remained outstanding under the Treaty of Amsterdam and that had to be settled before the enlargement of the EU in 2004, and various other issues not directly connected with enlargement. The main focus of the treaty was the establishment of principles governing the distribution of seats in the EP, the composition of the Commission and a new definition of QMV within the Council. In accordance with the provisions incorporated in the Treaty of Nice, from 1 November 2004 the weighting system was as follows: France, Germany, Italy and the UK 29 votes each; Poland and Spain 27 votes each; the Netherlands 13 votes; Belgium, the Czech Republic, Greece, Hungary and Portugal 12 votes each; Austria and Sweden 10 votes each; Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Lithuania and Slovakia seven votes each; Cyprus, Estonia, Latvia, Luxembourg and Slovenia four votes each; and Malta three votes. A qualified majority was reached if a majority of member states (in some cases a two-thirds’ majority) approved and if at least 232 votes out of a total of 321 were cast in favour (72.3% of the total—approximately the same share as under the previous system). In addition, a member state could request confirmation that the votes in favour represented at least 62% of the total population of the EU. Should this not be the case, the decision would not be adopted by the Council. The number of weighted votes required for the adoption of a decision (referred to as the `qualified majority threshold’) was reassessed in response to a change in the number of EU member states.</p>
                         <p>Reforms approved under the 2009 Treaty of Lisbon provided for the extension and redefinition of QMV in the Council and the ending of the system of national vetoes in a number of further policy areas (including combating climate change, energy, emergency aid, and security). From November 2014 a `double majority’ came into effect, defined as representing at least 55% of the members of the Council (i.e. composed of at least 15 of the current 27 member states) and representing member states comprising at least 65% of the EU’s population (while a blocking minority must include at least four member states representing over 35% of the EU population). However, in cases where the Council is not acting on the basis of a Commission proposal, the double majority threshold is 72% of the members of the Council, representing at least 65% of the EU population. The Treaty of Lisbon included a provision permitting, subject to prior unanimous approval by national legislatures, the introduction of double majority voting in an area hitherto requiring unanimity (except in a small number of areas, including defence, foreign policy and taxation).</p>
                         <int-org-section id="WB02047.IO.TXT.440" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio casee">
                              <heading>GENERAL SECRETARIAT</heading>
                              <dir-list>
                                   <dir-entry sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Secretary-General of the Council of the European Union</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Thérèse</forename>
                                                       <surname>Blanchet</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                   </dir-entry>
                              </dir-list>
                              <org-list>
                                   <org-list-head>Directorates-General</org-list-head>
                                   <org-entry id="WB02047.IO.TXT.79" media="PRINTANDONLINE" print-only="NO" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ORG-ENTRYREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                                        <org-entry-head>
                                             <org-entry-name>Legal Service</org-entry-name>
                                             <abbr>JUR</abbr>
                                        </org-entry-head>
                                        <role-group>
                                             <role>Dir-Gen.</role>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Emer</forename>
                                                       <surname>Finnegan</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </role-group>
                                   </org-entry>
                                   <org-entry media="PRINTANDONLINE" print-only="NO" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ORG-ENTRYREF">
                                        <org-entry-head>
                                             <org-entry-name>General and Institutional Policy</org-entry-name>
                                             <abbr>GIP</abbr>
                                        </org-entry-head>
                                        <role-group>
                                             <role>Dir-Gen.</role>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Didier</forename>
                                                       <surname>Seeuws</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </role-group>
                                   </org-entry>
                                   <org-entry id="WB02047.IO.TXT.81" media="PRINTANDONLINE" print-only="NO" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ORG-ENTRYREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                                        <org-entry-head>
                                             <org-entry-name>Organizational Development and Services</org-entry-name>
                                             <abbr>ORG</abbr>
                                        </org-entry-head>
                                        <role-group>
                                             <role>Dir-Gen.</role>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>William</forename>
                                                       <surname>Shapcott</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </role-group>
                                   </org-entry>
                                   <org-entry id="WB02047.IO.TXT.82" media="PRINTANDONLINE" print-only="NO" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ORG-ENTRYREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                                        <org-entry-head>
                                             <org-entry-name>Agriculture, Fisheries, Social Affairs and Health</org-entry-name>
                                             <abbr>LIFE</abbr>
                                        </org-entry-head>
                                        <role-group>
                                             <role>Dir-Gen.</role>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Cesare</forename>
                                                       <surname>Onestini</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </role-group>
                                   </org-entry>
                                   <org-entry id="WB02047.IO.TXT.83" media="PRINTANDONLINE" print-only="NO" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ORG-ENTRYREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                                        <org-entry-head>
                                             <org-entry-name>Foreign Affairs, Enlargement and Civil Protection</org-entry-name>
                                             <abbr>RELEX</abbr>
                                        </org-entry-head>
                                        <role-group>
                                             <role>Dir-Gen.</role>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Maryem</forename>
                                                       <surname>van den Heuvel</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </role-group>
                                   </org-entry>
                                   <org-entry id="WB02047.IO.TXT.855475" media="PRINTANDONLINE" print-only="NO" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ORG-ENTRYREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                                        <org-entry-head>
                                             <org-entry-name>Justice and Home Affairs</org-entry-name>
                                             <abbr>JAI</abbr>
                                        </org-entry-head>
                                        <role-group>
                                             <role>Dir-Gen.</role>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Christine</forename>
                                                       <surname>Roger</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </role-group>
                                   </org-entry>
                                   <org-entry id="WB02047.IO.TXT.8532435" media="PRINTANDONLINE" print-only="NO" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ORG-ENTRYREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                                        <org-entry-head>
                                             <org-entry-name>Transport, Energy, Environment and Education</org-entry-name>
                                             <abbr>TREE</abbr>
                                        </org-entry-head>
                                        <role-group>
                                             <role>Dir-Gen.</role>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Peter</forename>
                                                       <surname>Javorčik</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </role-group>
                                   </org-entry>
                                   <org-entry id="WB02047.IO.TXT.85" media="PRINTANDONLINE" print-only="NO" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ORG-ENTRYREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                                        <org-entry-head>
                                             <org-entry-name>Communication and Information</org-entry-name>
                                             <abbr>COMM</abbr>
                                        </org-entry-head>
                                        <role-group>
                                             <role>Dir-Gen.</role>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Agnieszka</forename>
                                                       <surname>Bartol</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </role-group>
                                   </org-entry>
                                   <org-entry id="WB02047.IO.TXT.855423" media="PRINTANDONLINE" print-only="NO" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ORG-ENTRYREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                                        <org-entry-head>
                                             <org-entry-name>Competitiveness and Trade</org-entry-name>
                                             <abbr>COMPET</abbr>
                                        </org-entry-head>
                                        <role-group>
                                             <role>Dir-Gen.</role>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Isabel</forename>
                                                       <surname>Riaño Ibáñez</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </role-group>
                                   </org-entry>
                                   <org-entry id="WB02047.IO.TXT.855124" media="PRINTANDONLINE" print-only="NO" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ORG-ENTRYREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                                        <org-entry-head>
                                             <org-entry-name>Economic and Financial Affairs</org-entry-name>
                                             <abbr>ECOFIN</abbr>
                                        </org-entry-head>
                                        <role-group>
                                             <role>Dir-Gen.</role>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Thomas</forename>
                                                       <surname>Westphal</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </role-group>
                                   </org-entry>
                                   <org-entry id="WB02047.IO.TXT.05022020" media="PRINTANDONLINE" print-only="NO" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ORG-ENTRYREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                                        <org-entry-head>
                                             <org-entry-name>Translation Service</org-entry-name>
                                             <abbr>LING</abbr>
                                        </org-entry-head>
                                        <role-group>
                                             <role>Deputy Dir-Gen.</role>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Máire</forename>
                                                       <surname>Killoran</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </role-group>
                                   </org-entry>
                                   <org-entry id="WB02047.IO.TXT.04022020.1" media="PRINTANDONLINE" print-only="NO" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="ORG-ENTRYREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                                        <org-entry-head>
                                             <org-entry-name>Digital Services</org-entry-name>
                                             <abbr>SMART</abbr>
                                        </org-entry-head>
                                        <role-group>
                                             <role>Deputy Dir-Gen.</role>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>David</forename>
                                                       <surname>Galloway</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </role-group>
                                   </org-entry>
                              </org-list>
                         </int-org-section>
                         <int-org-section id="WB02046.IO.TXT.5" id-root="int-org_eu" iso="int-org_eu" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="INT-ORG-SECTREF" usage="ewyb edio">
                              <heading>Permanent Representatives of Member States</heading>
                              <dir-list>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.1024" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Austria</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <title>Dr</title>
                                                       <forename>Thomas</forename>
                                                       <surname>Oberreiter</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>30 ave de Cortenberg, 1040 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 234-51-00</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 235-61-00</fax>
                                             <email>bruessel-ov@bmeia.gv.at</email>
                                             <internet>www.bmeia.gv.at/oev-bruessel</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.2010" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Belgium</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Willem</forename>
                                                       <surname>van de Voorde</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>65 rue Belliard, 1040 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 233-21-11</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 231-10-75</fax>
                                             <email>info.belgoeurop@diplobel.fed.be</email>
                                             <internet>europeanunion.diplomatie.belgium.be</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <data-protection date-added="01.05.2007" ticked-box="Y" />
                                        <dir-entry-name>Bulgaria</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Rumen</forename>
                                                       <surname>Alexandrov</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>49 sq. Marie-Louise, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 235-83-01</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 374-91-88</fax>
                                             <email>mission.brusselseu@bg-permrep.eu</email>
                                             <internet>www.mfa.bg/embassies/belgiumpp</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.38568786" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Croatia</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Irena</forename>
                                                       <surname>Andrassy</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>108 rue d'Arlon, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 436-71-02</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 436-71-99</fax>
                                             <email>hr.perm.rep@mvep.hr</email>
                                             <internet>mvep.gov.hr/eu/en</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.3856" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Cyprus</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Christina</forename>
                                                       <surname>Rafti</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>61 ave de Cortenberg, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 739-51-11</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 735-45-52</fax>
                                             <email>cy.perm.rep@mfa.gov.cy</email>
                                             <internet>www.mfa.gov.cy/mfa/permrep/permrep_brussels.nsf/index_gr/index_gr?opendocument</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.6089" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Czech Republic</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Edita</forename>
                                                       <surname>Hrdá</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>15 rue Caroly, 1050 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 213-91-11</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 213-91-85</fax>
                                             <email>eu.brussels@embassy.mzv.cz</email>
                                             <internet>www.mzv.cz/representation_brussels</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.2011" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Denmark</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Carsten</forename>
                                                       <surname>Grønbech-Jensen</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>73 rue d’Arlon, 1040 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 233-08-11</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 230-93-84</fax>
                                             <email>brurep@um.dk</email>
                                             <internet>eu.um.dk</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.2850" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Estonia</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Aivo</forename>
                                                       <surname>Orav</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>11–13 rue Guimard, 1040 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 227-39-10</telephone>
                                             <email>permrep.eu@mfa.ee</email>
                                             <internet>eu.mfa.ee</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.2012" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Finland</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Markku</forename>
                                                       <surname>Keinänen</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>80 ave de Cortenbergh, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 287-84-11</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 287-84-05</fax>
                                             <email>sanomat.eue@formin.fi</email>
                                             <internet>www.finland.eu</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.2013" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>France</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Philippe</forename>
                                                       <surname>Léglise-Costa</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>14 place de Louvain, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 229-82-11</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 230-99-50</fax>
                                             <email>courrier.bruxelles-dfra@diplomatie.gouv.fr</email>
                                             <internet>www.rpfrance.eu</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.2014" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Germany</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Michael</forename>
                                                       <surname>Clauss</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>8–14 rue Jacques de Lalaing, 1040 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 787-10-00</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 787-20-00</fax>
                                             <email>info@bruessel-eu.diplo.de</email>
                                             <internet>www.bruessel-eu.diplo.de</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.2015" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Greece</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Ioannis</forename>
                                                       <surname>Vrailas</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>19–21 rue Jacques de Lalaing, 1040 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 551-56-11</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 551-56-51</fax>
                                             <email>mea.bruxelles@rp-grece.be</email>
                                             <internet>www.mfa.gr/brussels/permanent-representation-eu</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.5791" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Hungary</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Bálint</forename>
                                                       <surname>Ódor</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>92–98 rue de Trèves, 1040 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 234-12-00</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 372-07-84</fax>
                                             <email>sec.beu@mfa.gov.hu</email>
                                             <internet>brusszel.eu.kormany.hu</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.2016" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Ireland</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Aingeal</forename>
                                                       <surname>O’Donoghue</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>50 rue Froissart, 1040 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 282-32-11</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 230-32-03</fax>
                                             <email>irlprb@dfa.ie</email>
                                             <internet>www.ireland.ie/en/eu/brussels</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.2017" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Italy</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Vincenzo</forename>
                                                       <surname>Celeste</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>7–15 rue du Marteau, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 220-04-11</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 219-34-49</fax>
                                             <email>rpue@rpue.esteri.it</email>
                                             <internet>italiaue.esteri.it</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.3680" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Latvia</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Lelde</forename>
                                                       <surname>Līce-Līcīte</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>23 ave des Arts, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 238-31-00</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 238-32-50</fax>
                                             <email>permrep.eu@mfa.gov.lv</email>
                                             <internet>www2.mfa.gov.lv/en/brussels/representatives</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.5670" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Lithuania</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Arnoldas</forename>
                                                       <surname>Pranckevičius</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>41–43 rue Belliard, 1040 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 771-01-40</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 771-45-97</fax>
                                             <email>office@eu.mfa.lt</email>
                                             <internet>eu.mfa.lt/eurep/en/</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.2018" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Luxembourg</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Sylvie</forename>
                                                       <surname>Lucas</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>75 ave de Cortenberg, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 737-56-00</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 736-14-29</fax>
                                             <email>bruxelles.rpue@mae.etat.lu</email>
                                             <internet>bruxelles-rpue.mae.lu</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.5679" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Malta</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Marlene</forename>
                                                       <surname>Bonnici</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>25 rue d’Archimède, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 238-27-00</telephone>
                                             <email>maltarep@gov.mt</email>
                                             <internet>maltaineu.gov.mt</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.2019" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Netherlands</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Robert</forename>
                                                       <surname>de Groot</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>4–10 ave de Cortenberg, 1040 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 679-15-11</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 679-17-75</fax>
                                             <email>bre@minbuza.nl</email>
                                             <internet>www.permanentrepresentations.nl/permanent-representations/pr-eu-brussels</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.1196" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Poland</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Piotr</forename>
                                                       <surname>Serafin</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                                  <person-note>acting</person-note>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>139 rue Stevin, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 780-42-00</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 780-42-97</fax>
                                             <email>bebrustpe@msz.gov.pl</email>
                                             <internet>www.gov.pl/web/eu/permanent-representation</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.2020" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Portugal</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Pedro</forename>
                                                       <surname>Lourtie</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>12 ave de Cortenberg, 1040 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 286-42-11</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 231-00-26</fax>
                                             <email>reper@reper-portugal.be</email>
                                             <internet>www.ue.missaoportugal.mne.pt</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Romania</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Iulia</forename>
                                                       <surname>Matei</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>107 ave de Cortenbergh, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 700-06-40</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 700-06-41</fax>
                                             <email>bru@rpro.eu</email>
                                             <internet>ue.mae.ro</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.5588" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Slovakia</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Petra</forename>
                                                       <surname>Vargová</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>79 ave de Cortenberg, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 743-68-11</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 743-68-88</fax>
                                             <email>eu.brussels@mzv.sk</email>
                                             <internet>mzv.sk/szbrusel-en</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.8827" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Slovenia</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Iztok</forename>
                                                       <surname>Jarc</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>45–46 blvd du Régent, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 213-63-00</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 213-63-01</fax>
                                             <email>slomission.eu@gov.si</email>
                                             <internet>brussels.representation.si</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.2023" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Spain</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Marcos Alonso</forename>
                                                       <surname>Alonso</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>52 blvd du Régent, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 509-86-11</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 511-19-40</fax>
                                             <email>reper.bruselasue@reper.maec.es</email>
                                             <internet>es-ue.org</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                                   <dir-entry id="EU.IO.2021" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="DIR-ENTRYREF">
                                        <dir-entry-name>Sweden</dir-entry-name>
                                        <person-group>
                                             <person>
                                                  <person-name>
                                                       <forename>Mikaela</forename>
                                                       <surname>Kumlin Granit</surname>
                                                  </person-name>
                                             </person>
                                        </person-group>
                                        <address-block>
                                             <address type="POSTAL">
                                                  <verbatim-address>30 sq. de Meeûs, 1000 Brussels</verbatim-address>
                                             </address>
                                             <telephone alsofax="N">(2) 289-56-11</telephone>
                                             <fax>(2) 289-56-00</fax>
                                             <email>representationen.bryssel@gov.se</email>
                                             <internet>www.regeringen.se/eu-representationen</internet>
                                        </address-block>
                                   </dir-entry>
                              </dir-list>
                              <p id="WB02047.IO.TXT.73">Preparation and co-ordination of the Council’s work (with the exception of agricultural issues, which are handled by the Special Committee on Agriculture) is entrusted to a Committee of Permanent Representatives, which meets in Brussels on a weekly basis and which comprises the permanent representatives of the member countries to the Union (who have senior ambassadorial status). A staff of national civil servants assists each ambassador.</p>
                         </int-org-section>
                    </int-org-block>
               </int-org-entry>
          </int-org-entryref>