<?xml version="1.0"?>
<country-survey id="AO.EC" id-root="ao" iso="ao" original-filename="agoecon.rtf" print-style="PGWIDTH" sect-type="economy" usage="ass" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
     <heading>
    
    Economy
  </heading>
     <alt-heading type="SECTION-LONG-UPPERCASE" usage="ass">Angola</alt-heading>
     <alt-heading type="COUNTRY-SHORT-TITLECASE" usage="ass">Economy</alt-heading>
     <author-group>
          <primary-authors>
               <person-name>
                    <forename>Brad</forename>
                    <surname>Safarik</surname>
                    <regnal>Lecturer in Political Science and International Relations, Université Catholique de l’Ouest, Angers, France, and Associate Researcher, Les Afriques dans le Monde, Institute d’Etudes Politiques de Bordeaux, France</regnal>
               </person-name>
          </primary-authors>
     </author-group>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Introduction</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P1">Angola has recently become the largest petroleum producer on the African continent, surpassing Nigeria and Algeria. The sector dominates the overall economy, comprising roughly one-third of total gross domestic product (GDP), 56% of government revenue and approximately 96% of total exports. In a solemn end-of-year speech on 18 December 2015, former President José Eduardo dos Santos admitted that the policies guiding his and his party’s vision had failed to achieve significant economic diversification capable of moving the economy out of its chronic dependence on oil exports. This revealing statement, coming from the head of state whose authoritarian administration had single-handedly guided government policy since 1979, served as a clear evidentiary signpost detailing the continued domination of the oil sector in the country’s overall political economy, as well as the narrow state-building agenda which the Movimento Popular de Libertação de Angola (MPLA) has enacted throughout its time in power.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P2">Considerable economic reforms have been attempted since the election of President João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço in 2017; however, the heavy dependence on a single natural resource has blunted their efficiency as the Angolan economy remains vulnerable to shocks to the global economy and the volatility of the oil market. The fiercely contested presidential election in August 2022 resulted in Lourenço’s re-election, although the MPLA lost its two-thirds majority in the Assembleia Nacional (National Assembly). Lourenço’s second term will be largely focused on finding ways to maintain power beyond the 2027 elections by improving living standards, diversifying the economy, and creating conditions for more employment opportunities. Recent favourable oil prices have provided some financial space to move forward towards these goals.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Key Current Indicators</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P3">Since the beginning of the 21st century, favourable conditions of global economic expansion have resulted in Angola’s GDP increasing significantly. Starting from US&#160;$9,130m. in 2000, GDP peaked at $137,200m. in 2014, although it has fallen back since to $67,400m. in 2021. During the beginning of the reconstruction era, annual GDP growth from 2000 until the global financial crisis in 2008 averaged nearly 10%. The significant increase in GDP translated into a rise in gross national income (GNI) per capita to a maximum of $7,630 in 2014, but this declined to $6,450 in 2022. The country’s high cost of living, persistent inflation, weak currency, and limited supply chains all contribute to making the GNI increase relative for the average Angolan.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P4">The booming oil market of the 2000s allowed the economy to grow to such an extent that Angola became eligible in 2012 to graduate from its status as a least developed country (LDC) based on the criteria of income alone. At the time of consideration, GNI per capita was estimated at US&#160;$4,518, far above the threshold for graduation set at $1,242 in 2016. Angola was recommended to graduate to lower-middle income status in 2016, with its transition planned for 2021. However, the era of booming oil prices came to an abrupt end in 2014, which left the economy in a recession from 2016 until 2021, exacerbated by the global COVID-19 pandemic. Due to these recent economic difficulties, the country’s graduation from LDC status has been pushed back to 2024, although it remains classified as a lower-middle income economy.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P5">While Angola’s socioeconomic conditions have registered significant improvements since the turn of the century, the overall economy continues to underperform. The country ranked 148th out of 189 countries in the United Nations (UN) Development Programme’s Human Development Index for 2020 despite noted improvements since the official end of the civil war in 2002. Significant growth in the macro economy provided a brief decrease in overall inequalities, although sustainable improvements have remained elusive. The Gini index, which measures inequalities through the distribution of income among individuals or households, has only marginally improved since its 2000 score of 52.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P6">
      Angola’s dependency on oil exports links its economic health to global markets. The combination of the pandemic, the destabilizing Russian war against Ukraine, weak investment in oil exploration and infrastructure alongside endemic corruption has severely hampered economic recovery. Transparency International ranked Angola 142nd out of 180 countries on its Corruption Perceptions Index in 2020. The overall business environment is classified among the worst in the world. According to the World Bank’s 2020 
      <i>Doing Business</i>
       report, the country ranked 177th out of 190 countries. Furthermore, although rich in material wealth, Angola’s economic performance has become decoupled from the development of its human capital. In the pivotal years from the 1991 Bicesse Accords until 2015 and the sustained drop in oil prices, the economy increased in real value by 229%, while employment only increased by 116%. The World Bank estimates that 80% of jobs available are informal and one-half of those are based in the primary sector, which contributes an estimated 35% of annual GDP.
    </p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P7">
      The overall population has nearly doubled since 2000, reaching 34.1m. in 2023. Angola has experienced greater urbanization than its regional neighbours because of the decades of civil war, creating increasing pressures on urban infrastructure. The absence of development opportunities continues to pull Angolans toward the cities, often ending up in the sprawling informal 
      <i>mussesques</i>
       looking for a better life. Despite this rural flight, rural populations make up 37% of the total population and continue to increase in absolute numbers. The human masses flowing towards urban centres represent a potent organic symbol of the MPLA’s continued inability to provide a viable socioeconomic base for rural communities. The roots of Angola’s extraverted economy and subsequent social inequalities were established during the long Portuguese colonial period and hardened through the decades of civil war that further distorted the national economy, furthering the trends of concentrating economic growth within narrow sectors of society.
    </p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Colonial Legacy</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P8">In important structural aspects, Portugal’s approach to developing its labour-intensive colonial economy differed significantly from its counterparts on the continent. The massive exportation of slaves to the New World led an already sparsely populated territory to seriously lack able-bodied workers to sustain an overseas colony. The cessation of slavery, approved by decree in 1858 and finally extinguished by 1878, took away a vital source of the workforce for the Portuguese overseas colonies and made the settlers’ agricultural production model obsolete, as paying the workers for their labour was untenable. Settlers were unable to produce commercially without the recourse to forced labour. Authorities had to walk a fine line by providing enough space and tacit support to endogenous production essential to the colony’s growth, development and social stability, while simultaneously exploiting this labour through coercive monocultural export schemes.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P9">Agricultural practices had already been significantly developed by the native populations, varying in techniques throughout the territory depending on the geographic and climatic conditions. Much of this production was concentrated in a few specific areas divided between the Kwanza river. In the northern region around the modern-day Malanje plateau was where the Bakongo and the Dembos peoples were most densely populated, due to favourable growing conditions for traditional crops such as cassava, rice and coffee, as well as potatoes, bananas, beans and grains. South of the Kwanza river, geography dictated different social structures.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P10">The imposing mountainous plateau of the Central Highlands sits at a high altitude (5,000&#160;ft–6,000&#160;ft above sea level) and has been a main source for the production of cassava, rice, beans and potatoes. The semi-arid region below the plateau (lower Huíla and Cunene provinces) allows for more diverse economic activities. The practice of subsistence agriculture focused on planting of certain cash crops (notably maize) and various local cereals such as millet and sorghum. Additionally, ideal conditions aligned for cattle herding and pastoralism, which are a pivotal economic and cultural activity of the regional populations including the Ambo, Nyaneka-Nkumbi and Herero peoples.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P11">
      Unable to compete with the endogenous production, the settlers instead monopolized the commercialization process of the goods produced. Supported by the protection inferred by their privileged social status provided by the colonial government, they engaged in often unfair trade practices in attempts to take advantage of, and further marginalize, the local populations. Angola’s colonial system was thus able to insert itself into global markets through a number of monoculture cash crops, first through the forced production of cotton, but later including coffee, corn, sisal and sugar. About 90% of the colonial production was spread out across African 
      <i>lavras</i>
       (planting fields) located throughout the Benguela-Bié plateau and sold through Portuguese middlemen onto the port of Lobito, which was specialized in the exportation of agricultural goods—including beans, manioc, rice and sisal—that were sown by the natives on lands largely owned by Europeans.
    </p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P12">The first official study of Angola’s colonial agricultural production was conducted in 1950, focused on the main colonial exports. A decade later, in 1962, the Missão de Inquéritos Agrícolas de Angola (Board of Agricultural Surveys) created the first national map identifying the various agricultural zones throughout the territory. Subsequent studies produced the vital statistics that would underscore the significant capacity of Angola’s agricultural sector. Before the Second World War, maize became the principal export crop. Planting priorities adapted alongside fluctuating global demand.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P13">The rising value of the coffee bean in the post-war period quickly made it by far the most important cash crop during the late colonial period. Leading up to the Second World War, colonial Angola achieved the highest coffee production in Africa, making it a national priority of Portugal to create the conditions to allow it to prosper. Once the word began to spread about coffee cultivation, more European farmers sought to control the lands where it could be grown but did so reluctantly, mostly due to the tropical diseases associated with its semi-tropical forests and savannas, coupled with the fierce resistance of the local populations. The main coffee growing region was north of the Kwanza river, encompassing nearly 80% of the total area and 80% of its ultimate production. Today production areas have spread further, covering the provinces of Uíge and Kwanza-Norte, but also includes parts of Malanje and Kwanza-Sul.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P14">Production peaked in the 1970s at around 250,000 metric tons annually. The increase in production meant further exploitation of the local work force. These rising tensions due to authoritarian exploitation and social instability sparked the war for liberation from colonial rule in 1961. Upon independence in 1975, European colonialists fled the country en masse, often sabotaging what they could not take with them. This chaotic transition decimated coffee production, while the international market simultaneously expanded with new competitors. The sector still holds great potential, with an ever-increasing market of global consumption. Considerable efforts have been made to revitalize the sector, though production levels remain far diminished from their colonial-era heights.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P15">According to the Food and Agricultural Organization of the UN (FAO), the area planted with coffee has increased five-fold since 2002, rising from 10,000&#160;ha to over 50,000&#160;ha in 2018. This has led to a modest production of 10,300 metric tons in 2021 due to a lack of technical capacity and investments in proper inputs, and the high presence of smallholder producers. Similar to other crops, overall yields have flatlined during the same period, being among the worst in the region. Nevertheless, given the historical importance of the coffee sector to the country’s economy, reinvesting in coffee production is seen to have particular potential for diversifying exports and the colonial era lays out a potential template to follow. A caveat must be made regarding the reliability of official statistics of the agricultural sector. Their proper compilation has long been a major concern of development partners, as official statistics remain largely opaque and lack rigorous scientific testing.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P16">The colonial political economy therefore emphasized building up the backbone of the colony through the modernization of its agricultural sector, consequently feeding, both literally and figuratively, the rest of the economy and its nascent manufacturing sector. However, this economic system was purposefully built to prevent the capacity to lay an independent foundation for national growth and development. Instead, the system was conceived for a controlled growth model in the service of providing natural resources for foreign economies, specifically that of Portugal and the major Western investors in the colonial economy—including the United Kingdom, France and Belgium. Once Angolans achieved political independence in 1975, economic growth quickly became dependent on foreign investment, expertise, and control over logistical operations, most notably in the oil sector.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P17">Western companies moved to establish partnerships with the newly formed state-owned enterprise (SOE) Sociedade Nacional de Combustíveis de Angola (SONANGOL), nationalized from the Portuguese company SACOR/Petrogal. Given its oversized importance to the stabilization of the country, the oil sector was the only one spared from the socialist policies of resource nationalism, and the company retained most of its original Portuguese employees. This practice of outsourcing major industries has since shaped the state’s capacity and engagement during the reconstruction period through private contracts with foreign companies forged through historic links including Brazil and Portugal, but also with emerging players such as the People’s Republic of China, the Russian Federation, the Republic of Korea (South Korea), the USA and Israel.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P18">Angola’s subordinate position as a passive producer of natural resources sought by growing Western economies conditioned the degree of independence the post-colonial country could exercise in decision-making and policy positions. The established interaction between the material foundations and the politico-institutional superstructure governing it eventually morphed into a formidable force against structural change, as attested to the enduring lack of economic diversification. Locked into this dynamic, the dependence on natural resource rents has created a two-tier social class system, a minority positioned to manage and exploit the rents (rent-seekers), and a majority condemned either to push the exploitative system along, or worse, being completely marginalized by it.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>A Nascent Rural Economy</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P19">Inspired by the Soviet bloc, the incoming Government nationalized the totality of Angola’s natural resources upon independence and established a centralized, planned economy around the nascent oil sector. The `socialist’ nature of the regime was only made official in October 1976 by the first Congress and was thus not written into the original Constitution of the Republic in 1975. The weakened state apparatus clearly lacked the means and capacity to rebuild the economy, but the goal of controlling the productive, commercial and distributive flows of resources would be achieved through the heavy influence of the government in economic affairs.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P20">The `socialist’ legacy of the nationalization of the economy has remained visible throughout, both as an ideological marker but also as a tool of political control. In 1980 President dos Santos declared that the development and consolidation of the private sector constituted an imminent danger to the socialist revolution. In reality, these claims were contradictory (private property and investment, as long as it served the common good, were protected by the Constitution), paradoxical (the Government should have been prioritizing means of improving efficiency in the ailing state-run national economy) and even absurd (the Law on Foreign Investment had already been published in 1979, aimed at attracting private foreign investment). The Government even overtly welcomed private investment in strategic sectors, especially oil.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P21">Revitalizing the agricultural sector was originally seen as a vital springboard to wider economic growth. However, taking complete control of such a complex economic sector while being wholly bereft of the means to properly manage it is a recipe for dissolution. The reality was that resources were scarce, the incoming bureaucracy disorganized, and logistics hampered. Furthermore, the plethora of newly established governmental entities had hardly any qualified staff to manage them. The Ministry of Agriculture, for example, had only 1% of its own personnel trained, a similar 1% of the total rural labour force was classified as technically trained, and most of the new agricultural schools were quickly closed due to a lack of resources.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P22">The first statistics of independent Angola’s agricultural production began to be compiled in 1977, though the numbers should be regarded with scepticism given the overall chaotic environment in which they began to be compiled and the lack of technical expertise in amassing the data. Centrally planned, ambitious targets were set and missed. Entirely beholden to the state, the agricultural sector experienced profound structural weaknesses due to systemic shortages across the board. The enormous divide between set production targets and actual production (sometimes only reaching 10% of their target) reveals an agricultural sector in complete disarray. As the country descended into civil war, the hopes of reviving the agricultural sector quickly ceded to the reality that an already established offshore oil economy would be the most important sector for the future of the country.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>The Domination of the Oil Sector</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P23">Oil was first discovered inland in the Kwanza Basin in 1955 and later offshore wells were created in 1968. The nationalized oil company SONANGOL, created in June 1976, has been the key economic actor in Angola since independence, responsible for negotiating contracts with foreign firms and managing the sector’s immense wealth production. Since 1985 oil has been officially recognized as the main source of financing for the country and has therefore become the focus and priority of the Government. Over-reliance on steady oil rents has been to the detriment of the other economic sectors. Dependence on the sector leaves Angola’s economy and its government revenue strongly tied to the whims of the volatile oil market.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P24">Oil profits financed the war machine as it absorbed nearly one-half of the Government’s total expenditure in the late 1980s and further increased with the heightening of hostilities post-1992. In the 1990s alone, the Government spent nearly four times the amount on military expenditures as that allocated for the health and education sector combined. The first discovery of ultra-deep water oil fields in 1996 incited a huge interest by foreign investors and spurred much needed foreign direct investment (FDI). 60% of Angola’s oil and gas is produced in the waters off Cabinda province. During the reconstruction period the oil and gas sectors dominated FDI, amounting to 82% overall between 2003 and 2017. Despite this heavy investment, crude output has been in decline since 2008.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P25">The enormous power and wealth concentrated within SONANGOL has also attracted considerable scrutiny over serious irregularities in the accounting of the company’s finances. A 2011 audit by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) found a US&#160;$32,000m. discrepancy in account activity of SONANGOL not registered in official budgetary accounts. While the dominant oil sector gave Angolan leaders their principal point of leverage in seeking loans and building alliances, the sector also drew the most scrutiny from international institutions seeking reforms of transparency within a country afflicted with pervasive poverty.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P26">Upstream investment in expanding and maintaining oil wells and gas fields has been insufficient, leading to considerable reservoir depletion. The proven reserves are estimated at 9,000m. barrels of crude oil and 11,000,000m. cubic feet of natural gas. Current oil output is estimated at 1.2m. barrels per day (b/d). Under current conditions, reserves are expected to effectively run dry by 2040. A difficult business environment of restrictions, regulations, informalities, inefficiencies and high production costs of US&#160;$40 per barrel have reduced the ability of new investments to move ahead. Strict currency controls required oil companies to process payments and dues through Angolan banks in the local currency, leaving them open to the fluctuating value of the kwanza. Banking reforms now allow companies to transfer their payments through local commercial banks in foreign exchange or in the local currency.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P27">Responding to these difficulties, the administration of João Lourenço has enacted wide ranging reforms of the sector and its main actor SONANGOL to boost activity. The company is being restructured to focus on the core functions of its principal upstream, midstream and downstream businesses. The management of concessionary rights were put under the management of the Agência Nacional de Petróleo, Gás e Biocombustíveis (ANPG—National Agency for Petroleum, Gas and Biofuels) in 2019. Under the new Hydrocarbon Exploration Strategy, 50 new concessionary blocs have been planned for auction by 2025. The company is on track for a partial privatization scheme of 30%, although the process will not be concluded before 2026.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P28">Due to a lack of domestic refining capacity, the Government spends an estimated US&#160;$2,000m. per year on refined petroleum imports. The country imports 70% of its petroleum products. Currently, only one operational refinery in Luanda transforms around 65,000 b/d, although three further refineries are currently under development. The opening of the next refinery in Cabinda province is far behind schedule. Planned to open in early 2022, it is now expected to become operational in mid-2024. Two other refineries are planned in Soyo and Lobito.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Investing in the Future</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P29">A major impediment to achieving sustained economic growth not reliant on the global oil market is the fact that Angola’s growth model is centred on the exploitation of natural resources without a clear strategy to convert gains into other forms of capital. Public funds are not significantly invested in diversified vehicles for further wealth creation, instead being mostly destined for the oil and mining sectors, two areas of the economy that already attract the most FDI. This imbalance has long been flagged as a major structural risk for the country’s overall stability.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P30">The lack of diversification in the economy has likewise disincentivized private venture capital investments in other sectors, leading to a situation where the country as a whole registers one of the worst disinvestment rates in sub-Saharan Africa. Overall, FDI registered a net negative of US&#160;$4,150m. in 2021 due to capital repatriation among the oil and gas companies. Tight controls over foreign investments in specific sectors have hampered the introduction of much needed financial resources. Current laws limit foreign participation to 49% for companies in the oil and gas sector, 50% for insurance and 10% for banking, although some exceptions to the rules exist.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P31">Alongside FDI, officials have long depended on official development assistance (ODA) from abroad to make up for their own lack of investment, notably in the sectors of health, education and agriculture. However, two decades after the end of the civil war and with a constant flow of oil revenue, organizations providing ODA have begun to move on. Angola came to be seen as too `wealthy’ in resources to merit intensive donor activity. The lack of transparency and serious reform by the Angolan authorities caused other organizations to reconsider their roles in providing basic services in sectors where the Government should be the central actor. The MPLA-led Government has long blurred the lines between private and public interests, effectively merging the two throughout the country’s development. The MPLA’s dominance across all spheres of government has created a political system of conflicting interests that represent a major hurdle in implementing serious economic reform measures. This friction has become further engrained due to the ambiguity between the modern laws established by the Constitution and the customary laws that had been respected before the arrival of the Portuguese. While remaining operational, the latter have been considerably weakened and undermined by often ambiguous legislation left open to interpretation.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P32">As GDP and GNI have increased, a direct correlation has been established with foreign donors and development institutions pulling out of the country. Net ODA has nearly halved in the past two decades, from US&#160;$302.2m. in 2000 to $159.4m. in 2018. Further exacerbating problems, tax revenue as a percentage of total GDP dropped from 28.7% in 2000 to 10.1% in 2019 due to the combination of a weak bureaucratic system, few enforceable regulations, and a limited number of formal companies adhering to the tax regime. In response, the Government did not move to fill the void left by the reduction in ODA or the departing non-governmental organizations (NGOs). In 2018 the administration created the Agência de Investimento Privado e Promoção das Exportações (AIPEX—Agency for Private Investment and Promotion of Exportations), which has been tasked with attracting FDI into a variety of sectors and promoting Angolans exports abroad. Currently, oil and diamonds make up approximately 96% of total exports.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P33">Low investment in the health, education and agricultural sectors have all contributed to Angola’s stagnation in global development rankings. Once believed to be a product of the war, this lack of investment in the human capital of its own people has continued throughout peacetime. This appears to refute the argument that were if not for the war, the Government would have funnelled considerably more resources into these sectors. The evidence piled up from the past two decades of budget allocation does not support this claim. During the decade following the end of the war, the country had never before been so endowed with financial resources. Nevertheless, that wealth was not invested in any meaningful way for a long-term strategy in these three key sectors. In sum, the decades of peacetime have brought social stability and improvements for the wealthy and well-connected, while lacking widespread material benefits and meaningful investment in human capital.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>State Influence over the Private Sector </heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P34">Despite attempts at economic reform, an engrained political desire for authoritarian control has so far impeded the emergence of a dynamic private sector free from government influence. The 1990s brought significant changes to the country as the Government began an incremental abandonment of the tenuous `Marxist-Leninist’ character of its governing philosophy. However, the omnipresence of SOEs throughout the economy has led many businesses to rely on public contracts for their operations or put them in direct competition with companies supported by the state. The persistence of underperforming SOEs throughout the economy further disincentivizes private investment, both foreign and national.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P35">The main vehicle merging state influence and the private sector was created by President dos Santos through his Fundação Eduardo dos Santos (FESA) set up in March 1996. Modelled on the philanthropic foundations of developed countries, the foundation sought to complement government policies of economic development through partnerships with companies supported by state patronage. The sources of the FESA’s funds are vague, however, with most of them coming from private national and international companies operating in Angola that felt compelled to contribute to the foundation to keep in the Government’s good graces, while some of the funds come from the state itself. This combination of mixed foreign capital, government officials (current and/or former) and public companies consolidated a new class of Angolans who were able to access and accumulate capital through their connections and demark themselves further from the population at large. For some, the FESA reinforced the powers of an authoritarian President through an institutionalized system of clientelism. Anyone accruing a significant amount of private wealth would need to remain loyal to the ruling party.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P36">This public/private funded FESA model would later be expanded upon with the creation in 2012 of a sovereign wealth fund, the Fundo Soberano de Angola (FSDEA). Directed by the then President’s son, José Filomeno dos Santos, the fund was endowed with US&#160;$5,000m. in public funds and initially invested primarily in mining, infrastructure, basic services, real estate and the agricultural sector alongside financial vehicles and instruments. The distribution of the funds throughout the economy eventually fed into the private interests of Angola’s elites as their investments sprawled across the major sectors of the economy.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P37">The arrival of the current President, João Lourenço, in 2017 saw various policy measures enacted to spur economic growth and at least performative attempts at combating endemic corruption, with varying degrees of success. The publication of the Panama Papers in 2016 revealed self-serving investments and mismanagement of public funds by the company in charge of the FSDEA’s management, Quantum Global, which was run by a close friend of the former President’s son, Jean-Claude Bastos de Morais. In January 2018 the new President dismissed the son of the former President from the sovereign wealth fund and had cut ties with Quantum Global by April of the same year. During the process the Angolan Government declared that it had recovered US&#160;$3,350m. in financial and non-financial assets. The FSDEA remains in operation and has attempted to provide further transparency through annual audits and adoption of the International Financial Reporting Standards.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Unloading State Assets: Liberalizing a `Socialist’ Past</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P38">Marking a new development strategy on the recommendation of the IMF and the World Bank, the administration of President Lourenço has begun unloading the extensive portfolio of public companies and infrastructure assets that have been weighing heavily on public finances. As the World Bank has demonstrated, SOEs have been extremely costly to state finances. Between 2013 and 2016 the Government spent nearly 1% of GDP covering general operational costs and salaries of SOEs and spent 2.5% of GDP on state subsidies. If the lucrative SONANGOL is excluded from calculations, the Government lost nearly US&#160;$848m. in 2015 and $221m. in 2016 through underperformance of the vast network of SOEs.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P39">To rectify this situation, the Government created the Programa de Privatizações. The new privatization policy was approved through a presidential decree in August 2019, conducted via the Instituto de Gestão de Activos e Participações do Estado (Institute of Asset Management and State Holdings) in June 2018, alongside the Ministry of Finance and with a recommended mandate of four years. In total the Government announced its intention to privatize in full or in part 195 public companies across the sectors of finance, agro-industry, fisheries, tourism, telecommunications, health, transportation, oil, construction, industry and real estate. The programme hopes to reduce the influence of SOEs in the overall economy and increase the quality and variety of services available.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P40">This process has marked a fundamental change in the character of the state as it cedes influence of various sectors of the economy to private actors. The vast list of assets assigned for privatization reveals the extent to which public companies have continued to play an enormous role in the national economy, far removed from its `socialist’ past, further revealing the limits of the `liberalization’ supposedly under way since the 1990s. The ambition of this privatization policy is vast and fraught with risks, given that the current global economic outlook and Angola’s itself are far from ideal. Much too ambitious, the programme remains operational but far behind schedule with around one third of the state companies privatized to mainly national companies. It remains to be seen which private actors will ultimately take over these state assets and what degree of entrepreneurial freedom they will ultimately have.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Agro-business</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P42">Agro-business has been identified as a critical sector for generating economic growth as well as being a vehicle for broader development potential. The sector holds great potential due to large areas of favourable climatic conditions and plentiful water sources. The largely informal agricultural sector employs almost one-half of the country’s workforce, although only 3% of those workers are formal workers. Family farms account for approximately 90% of planting and harvesting, producing around 82% of the country’s total agricultural production. In 2022 the sector contributed 9.5% of GDP. Despite overall increases in production due to the expansion of harvested land, the country still imports nearly one-half of its required foodstuffs.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P43">While modest, the overall trend in investments has been positive. However, available credit from the national banking sector destined for agricultural development represents less than 5% of all credit allocated. Since 2000, the Government has never allocated more than 2% of its total budget to public investments in the agricultural sector. This underinvestment remains far below purported goals. Angola joined the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme Compact in August 2014, the goal of which was dedicating 10% of national budgets for the proper development of the agricultural sector across the continent in order to spark a continent wide `green revolution’. This goal is clearly far from reality. The continued underfunding of the agricultural sector is a clear indicator that the discourse of its revival will continue to encounter serious complications as it remains severely under resourced, structured as such throughout the decades set by political priorities.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P44">The sector remains beset by a host of difficulties, namely degraded infrastructure, disorganized supply chains, and the lack of a formal food distribution network for most producers. Furthermore, major climatic challenges have also frustrated attempts at renewal. Erratic rainfall leaves the southern portion of the country vulnerable to cyclical periods of drought, thus creating conditions for malnourishment, increased indices of poverty and an underperforming regional economy. The scarcity of water is becoming an ever more rising concern among regional economic actors, inflaming social tensions between the few commercial actors in the region and the rural populations. The relatively recent development and expansion of private ranches have further aggravated the situation, due not only to the limited water sources but also increased land grabbing practices of communal lands that traditionally serve rural communities for vital subsistence agriculture and corridors for transhumance migrations.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Chinese-built Farms</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P45">Foreign investment is made even more important given these realities. Within the agricultural sector specifically, China has been a key partner in attempts at modernizing the sector. Angola has long served as Beijing’s major entrance point into Africa in its loan diplomacy. Its principal interest in maintaining a flexible relationship with Luanda was both its privileged access to oil as well as the signing of major infrastructure contracts favouring Chinese firms.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P46">China has positioned itself for a long-term presence in Angola by building political capital with the Government through its use of favourable loan terms, often backed with oil guarantees. In 2004 China offered its most ambitious oil-backed loan to any country at the time: a US&#160;$2,000m. line of credit with an interest rate one percentage point lower than that offered by Western financial institutions, with a built-in grace period included. This loan marked a major turning point in Sino-Angolan relations for its sheer scale and crucial timing in the reconstruction efforts of the country. The sudden infusion of money similarly sparked internal infighting within the leadership regarding the allocation and disbursement of the new financing.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P47">In the rural economy the partnership took the form of various infrastructure projects including transportation networks, water irrigation canals, industrial farms and machinery. The construction of seven agro-industrial state farms in particular constituted a massive investment by the Government into an area that had been largely neglected until the establishment of this new partnership. The farms were built by Chinese companies between 2011 and 2014. However, due to a complex process of managerial and financial instability provoked by Angola’s political class, the farms have underperformed and significantly degraded in the years following their construction. Two of the farms were eventually handed over to the army, the Forças Armadas de Angola, while nearly all the rest have since been privatized by the Government for significant losses compared to their initial investment value.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P48">More oil-backed loans followed, reaching US&#160;$4,500m. worth of credit extended by China’s Eximbank. Their impact has been felt across the economy. The reconstruction programme was managed through the Gabinete de Reconstrução Nacional (Angola’s Reconstruction Office), run by the President’s inner circle and ultimately placing him at the heart of the country’s rebuilding. The policies pursued via these loans would reveal the priorities of the Angolan elite as they sought to solidify their positions of dominance while setting the path for the country’s emergence into peacetime. However, the Chinese loans are not accounted for in the national budget and instead follow the opaque nature of Angolan finances overall.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Fisheries and Forestry</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P49">Angola is favourably positioned geographically, with an extensive coastline of 1,650&#160;km located between the Benguela current system in the south and the Guinea current system in the north. The main species fished are shrimp, horse mackerel, tuna and sardinella. The latter is particularly abundant and remains at sustainable levels. The sector is enormously important as a source of economic activity, both formal and informal, as well as food security. While 6m. Angolans suffer from insufficient nourishment, fish proteins are a vital source of nutrition for the population with access to these resources.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P50">The fisheries sector was the third most important to the overall economy until the end of the war in 2002. In 2018 it contributed 2.1% of total GDP. Fishing production levels rose consistently until 2017, when they peaked at some 532,000 metric tons, but they fell back to 403,000 tons in 2019 and 377,000 tons in 2020, before, in the following year matching the previous peak, by reaching 532,000 tons. 80% of fish production is sold in domestic markets. Very little is exported internationally—only about 5%—although exports have tripled since 2012. Total catches are divided between industrial sources (60%) and artisanal fisheries (40%). Industrial fishing is mostly carried out by foreign vessels leased to or in joint-venture with Angolan companies, dominated by Russians, Europeans (Italy, Portugal, Spain), and Asians (South Korea, Taiwan, China). Over 90% of the estimated 60,000 jobs in the sector comes from artisanal fishing.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P51">Beyond its expansive coastline, the country’s 66.6m.&#160;ha of forests also hold significant economic potential. More than 55% of Angola's lands are forested. A large part of these forests make up part of the greater Miombo Forest area that spreads throughout Southern Africa. Between 2010 and 2021 Angola registered the biggest net loss in forested area in southern Africa, at a rate of 548,000&#160;ha per year. A significant part of this loss is linked to smallholder farming, illegal logging, and the burning of wood for charcoal production among rural communities. The laws governing the exploitation of the country’s forests were updated in 2017, replacing the colonial-era regulations of the 1950s. A new Forest and Wildlife Guard Corps was created in 2022 to better management the country's flora and fauna. The agriculture, fisheries and forestry sectors combined accounted for approximately 13.6% of overall GDP in 2022.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Mining</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P52">The mining sector contributes significantly to the national economy, although similarly to the oil sector it produces relatively few jobs by employing barely over 1% of the total workforce. Angola is the world’s seventh largest producer of diamonds, comprising around 7% of global output. Diamond exploitation is the most developed mining commodity and the country’s second main source of export revenue and thus foreign currency. In 2022 diamonds brought in a record US&#160;$2,000m. after an increase in global market prices. Nearly all of the exploited mines are located in the northern provinces of Lunda-Norte and Lunda-Sul, although large swathes of territory remain unexplored. The sector has long been tarnished by allegations of corruption and cronyism linked to the sale of `blood diamonds’ during the civil war and opaque connections to former President dos Santos’s family. In an attempt to improve its image and promote more foreign investment in the sector, the country became a full member of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative in 2022.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P53">Although the country has adhered to the Kimberley Process (an initiative aimed at preventing the sale of blood diamonds on international markets) since 2003, illegal artisanal mines remain commonplace. Informal mining is often carried out by Congolese miners migrating between the border with the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). Official extraction, concession and rights allocation has been managed by the state-owned Empresa Nacional de Diamantes de Angola (ENDIAMA), while the commercialization was controlled through the state-owned Empresa Nacional de Comercialização de Diamantes de Angola (SODIAM). These companies are part of the larger privatization scheme, although the bidding process for both companies has been put on hold.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P54">Alongside diamonds, a vast array of industrial and precious metal deposits has been identified throughout the territory, including gold, iron, copper, zinc, lead, phosphate and manganese, but none has been seriously exploited on an industrial scale. Certain mineral deposits and commodities have seen recent development, including cement, crushed stone, granite, limestone, marble, quartz, salt, sand and gypsum. The full potential of Angola’s mineral resource wealth remains understudied.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Manufacturing and Services</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P55">Driven in large part by banking and telecommunications, the services sector has seen the largest constant increase in job creation in recent years, adding over 1m. jobs between 2008 and 2014. The banking sector has grown exponentially since the end of the civil war. The sector developed from managing US&#160;$2,000m. in assets in 2003 to $79,000m. in 2013, ranking as the third largest in sub-Saharan Africa, behind only South Africa and Nigeria. A total of 26 commercial banks currently operate in the country, although their capacity to provide credit to other sectors remains limited. In total, services now account for around 45% of total employment. The transportation sector grew the most in 2022 as new competition entered the market and travellers became mobile again after the COVID-19 pandemic. However, a general lack of technical and skilled labour leaves out an important section of Angolans who are unable to occupy advanced positions that are instead often held by foreigners.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P56">Domestic manufacturing has increased significantly, powered in large part by the rise in the services sector. Increased consumption in food and beverages has concentrated the most activity, although manufacturing of plastics, paper, pulp and industrial chemicals has also expanded. The manufacturing sector makes up 6% of GDP and provides employment for 8% of the formal workforce, although it remains fragile. Private investment faces deep structural impediments to competitive and sustainable growth due to difficulties in procuring affordable and reliable inputs, including the most basic: electricity, transportation, telecommunications and financial capital. Tourism has been identified as a potential area for growth, but the sector lacks basic infrastructure, trained human resources, and a reliable customer base.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P57">Despite a massive reconstruction effort, only around one-third of the population has access to reliable electricity (43% urban, 8% rural) with blackouts not uncommon even in the major cities. The World Bank recently ranked the country 156th out of 190 in electricity access as increased capacity has not translated into improved distribution, although officials are aiming to provide a 60% national electrification rate by 2025. To improve internet coverage, the Angosat-2 telecommunications satellite was launched in October 2022 after the first satellite lost contact soon after its launch in December 2017. Approximately one-quarter of the population are internet users and nearly one-half use mobile telephones. The telecommunications sector has traditionally been dominated by the state and the politico-military elite, but reforms have brought new companies into the sector.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P58">The existence of 77 river basins and 43 hydrological basins throughout the territory provides significant potential for hydroelectricity, which currently produces nearly 60% of energy needs. Only around 20% of the 75,000-km road network is paved, leaving many areas of the country largely inaccessible during seasonal flooding. The 2,750&#160;km of railway lines built in the colonial era remain in use, with three main lines transporting goods from the east to the western port cities of Lobito, Luanda and Namibe. The port of Lobito and the Lobito railway corridor (stretching 1,300&#160;km into Zambia and the DRC) are scheduled for privatization to bring in new business opportunities via private investment.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Monetary Policy Reforms</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P59">The era of reconstruction has left Angola’s leaders with a massive debt to pay off, two-thirds of which is held in foreign currencies. Economic difficulties since 2015 have led to lower economic output and considerable depreciation of the kwanza, which has in turn led to a considerable increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio: from 57% in 2015, to over 120% in 2020, although it was reduced to 63% in 2023. Servicing external debts was estimated to exceed 100% of total fiscal revenues in 2020. The depreciation of the currency also played a role in absorbing the budgetary shocks due to the volatility of the oil market as well as the COVID-19 pandemic. Increasing oil prices led the currency to appreciate 26.2% in 2022, although it has receded since.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P60">Fiscal policies implemented by the central bank, the Banco Nacional de Angola (BNA), supported by the IMF and the World Bank, have eased the economic stress, although the margins to act remain limited. Since mid-October 2019 the official currency, the kwanza, has been converted to a flexible exchange rate regime. Rising inflation rates had initially been brought under control by the BNA after the end of the war, but returned from 2014. Peaking at 40% in December 2016, inflation declined to approximately 12.3% in July 2023. A financial stability department was set up in July 2022 to co-ordinate macroeconomic policies among supervisory agencies. The Government has sought to reduce fuel subsidies since 2014, leading to periodic popular protests, and violent clashes in June 2023 resulted in the President dismissing the Minister of State for Economic Co-ordination. Despite public anger, the package of economic reforms implemented by the administration of João Lourenço led to three credit rating upgrades between September 2021 and 2022.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Restructuring Debts</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P61">On a bilateral basis, China is by far Angola’s biggest creditor having loaned approximately US&#160;$40,000m. over the last 20 years. (More than $19,000m. remains to be repaid.) One-half of the country’s public debt was owed to China in 2020 and Angola has been Africa’s biggest borrower of Chinese funds. However, the economic fallout from the COVID-19 pandemic is putting additional pressure on this Sino-Angolan partnership. The oil payments with China were indexed to a higher price per barrel at the time of negotiating the loans, meaning that Angola must send oil in much higher volumes in order to compensate for the lower market prices.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P62">These oil-for-loans partnerships have spurred significant infrastructure projects and contributed to employment across the country. However, they have also left the country with significant debt and new infrastructure that has not brought the desired added value to the economy. In some cases, the poor quality of construction has left these relatively new infrastructure projects in need of further public investment. Under the administration of President Lourenço, Angola began to reduce the amount of oil shipped to China as part of paying off its debts, in an attempt to send a signal to Beijing that it hoped to renegotiate the terms of the loan repayments. Chinese lenders ultimately agreed to a three-year debt moratorium in June 2020.</p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P63">Due to the volatility in the oil market and the sub-par investment projects, the traditional oil-for-loans model is being re-evaluated. Searching for new financing opportunities has led the administration into new negotiations with the IMF. President Lourenço established an agreement with the Fund for a loan valued at US&#160;$3,700m., the largest such loan for an African country. In exchange, Angola had to open up the Government’s accounting books to periodic review as well as reconsider the indebting practice of oil-for-infrastructure loans practised extensively with China. No longer able to follow his predecessor’s finance and investment model, the current administration has had to create its own pathway to economic growth. This latest round of negotiations will likely have significant repercussions on the Sino-Angolan relationship.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Conclusion</heading>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P64">The GDP expansion in the last two decades (an increase of 1,010%) has been massive, but the streamlined, vertical nature of oil rents combined with the systematic misuse of these funds has contributed to equally huge social inequalities. Anti-corruption reforms combating money laundering, allowing for more transparency of financial transactions, and a more streamlined process for investors have eased access to foreign and international lenders. While some of the military and political elites linked to cases of corruption during the former administration have been pursued by the judicial system, others have maintained close ties with the current Government. </p>
          <p id="AO.EC.SGM.672413.2.SAFARIK.P65">The MPLA-led Government deserves credit for establishing both social and political stability in Angola, but it also invites serious criticism over the country’s continued languishing among the bottom ranks of the world in social development indicators. Having been in power since independence, the MPLA’s grip on power is becoming ever more tenuous as the population grows restless. Too many Angolans feel excluded by the authoritarian political system that rules their lives through fear, intimidation, disrespect and marginalization. The contested electoral results of September 2022, with the MPLA winning 51.4% of the vote, revealed a deep divide in the Government’s policies and a strong will for political change. Whether the MPLA party-state is capable of implementing inclusive, fundamental reforms to the political and economic systems will be the key question hanging over the country until the next decisive elections in 2027.</p>
     </gen-section>
</country-survey>