<?xml version="1.0"?>
<country-survey id="AO.GE" id-root="ao" iso="ao" original-filename="agogeog.rtf" print-style="PGWIDTH" sect-type="geography" usage="ass" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
     <country-head>Angola</country-head>
     <heading>Physical and Social Geography</heading>
     <alt-heading type="SECTION-LONG-UPPERCASE" usage="ass">Angola</alt-heading>
     <alt-heading type="COUNTRY-SHORT-TITLECASE" usage="ass">Physical and Social Geography</alt-heading>
     <author-group>
          <primary-authors>
               <person-name>
                    <forename>René</forename>
                    <surname>Pélissier</surname>
               </person-name>
          </primary-authors>
     </author-group>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Physical Features</heading>
          <p id="AO.GEOG.1">The Republic of Angola, covering an area of 1,246,700&#160;sq&#160;km (481,354&#160;sq&#160;miles), is the largest Portuguese-speaking state in Africa. It is composed of 18 provinces, one of which, Cabinda (formerly known as Portuguese Congo), is separated from the others by the oceanic outlet of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC, formerly Zaire) and the delta of the River Congo. On its landward side Cabinda is surrounded by the DRC and the Republic of the Congo. Greater Angola is bordered to the north and east by the DRC, to the east by Zambia and to the south by Namibia. Excluding the Cabinda enclave, Angola extends 1,277&#160;km from the northern to the southern border, and 1,236&#160;km from the mouth of the Cunene river to the Zambian border.</p>
          <p id="AO.GEOG.2">Two-thirds of Angola is a plateau. The average elevation is 1,050&#160;m–1,350&#160;m above sea level, with higher ranges and massifs reaching above 2,000&#160;m. The highest point of Angola is Mt Moco (2,620&#160;m) in Huambo province. Through the central part of the inland plateau runs the watershed of Angola’s rivers. The coastal plain on the Atlantic is separated from this plateau by a sub-plateau zone, which varies in breadth from about 160&#160;km in the north to 25&#160;km–40&#160;km in the centre and south. The Namib desert occupies the coastal plain at a considerable height above Namibe. Towards the Cuango (Kwango) basin, in Zaire province, a sedimentary hollow forms the Cassange depression, in which cotton is cultivated. The north-western section of the Angolan plateau has jungle-covered mountains, which are suitable for the cultivation of coffee. The Mayombe range in Cabinda is covered by equatorial jungle.</p>
          <p id="AO.GEOG.3">Except for the Cuanza (Kwanza) river, which is navigable up to Dondo (193&#160;km upstream), Angolan rivers do not provide easy access to the interior from the coast. On the other hand, they are harnessed for the production of electricity and for irrigation. The main rivers are, above the Cuanza, the Chiloango (Cabinda), the Congo, the M’bridge, the Loge, the Dange and the Bengo. The Cassai (Kasai), Cuilo (Kwilu) and Cuango rivers are known more for their importance to the DRC than for their upper reaches in Angola, although many tributaries of the Kasai intersect the Angolan plateau, exposing rich deposits of alluvial diamonds in the Lunda provinces.</p>
          <p id="AO.GEOG.4">
      Angola has a tropical climate, locally tempered by altitude. The Benguela current, along the coast, influences and reduces rainfall in that part of the country, which is arid or semi-arid. The interior uplands in the provinces of Bié, Huambo and Hu
      
      íla enjoy an equable climate.
    </p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Population</heading>
          <p id="AO.GEOG.5">According to the census held in 2014 (the first to be conducted since 1970), Angola had 25,789,024 inhabitants. The population was officially estimated at 34,094,077 in mid-2023, with a popu­lation density of 27.3 persons per sq&#160;km. Angola has considerable ethnic diversity, although all indigenous groups, of which the Ovimbundu and Mbundu are the most numerous, are of Bantu stock. An important characteristic of the population is its youth, as about 44.4% are under 15 years old and only 2.5% are over 65. According to World Bank figures, the average life expectancy at birth in 2021 was 61.6 (males 59.0; females 64.3). In 2012–21 Angola’s population increased at an estimated average annual rate of 3.4%.</p>
          <p id="AO.GEOG.6">Following the onset of civil strife in the mid-1970s, Angola experienced considerable economic dislocation, accompanied by a widespread regrouping of African populations, brought about by insecurity and massacres. The population is predom­inantly engaged in food-crop farming and, in the south, in cattle raising. Only in areas where coffee, cotton and maize are cultivated are Angolans engaged to any extent in commercial agriculture. An estimated 57.3% of the employed labour force was engaged in the agricultural sector in 2020. Serious food shortages and periods of famine period­ically beset central and southern Angola. The lengthy civil conflict created problems of `internal’ refugees (a total of 4.3m. were believed to have been displaced by the conflict), and in late 2006 it was estimated that there were some 171,393 Angolan refugees in surrounding countries, despite the return of almost 400,000 since the ceasefire of April 2002. By mid-2012 the number of Angolan refugees remaining in the region had decreased to approximately 120,000 and in June 2012 the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees declared that Angolan exiles who had fled from the various conflicts since 1965 would no longer be considered refugees, owing to the relative stability of Angola’s political climate and the availability of repatriation options. Efforts continued thereafter to normalize the status of the remaining former Angolan refugees or to encourage their return to Angola.</p>
          <p id="AO.GEOG.7">The population of the capital, Luanda (which was 480,613 at the 1970 census), had grown to an estimated 2.8m by mid-2022, and the city has experienced a boom in construction since 2000. The urban centres of Benguela and Lobito were among those most seriously damaged by the war, and the port of Lobito suffered from the disruption of traffic with the DRC and Zambia. Huambo, formerly an important centre for rail traffic to the eastern regions and to the DRC and Zambia, and for road traffic to Luanda and Namibia, was once again expected to become a focal point of economic activity. Other centres, such as Namibe, Lubango, Cuito and Luena, also suffered from the war and local disorder. The city of Cabinda has benefited from the exploitation of offshore petroleum resources, while pioneer towns such as Menongue and Saurimo may eventually assume new im­port­ance as regional centres.</p>
     </gen-section>
</country-survey>