<?xml version="1.0"?>
<country-survey id="AO.HI" id-root="ao" iso="ao" original-filename="agohist.rtf" print-style="PGWIDTH" sect-type="history" usage="ass" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="urn:pubid:EuropaWorld.com:doctypes:dita:europaworld.xsd">
     <heading>History</heading>
     <alt-heading type="SECTION-LONG-UPPERCASE" usage="ass">Angola</alt-heading>
     <alt-heading type="COUNTRY-SHORT-TITLECASE" usage="ass">History</alt-heading>
     <author-group>
          <primary-authors>
               <person-name>
                    <forename>Brad</forename>
                    <surname>Safarik</surname>
                    <regnal>Lecturer in Political Science and International Relations, Université Catholique de l’Ouest, Angers, France, and Associate Researcher, Les Afriques dans le Monde, Institute d’Etudes Politiques de Bordeaux, France</regnal>
               </person-name>
          </primary-authors>
     </author-group>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Introduction</heading>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P1">The arrival of the 21st century marked a major turning point in the history of Angola as the civil war (1975–2002) fought between the Movimento Popular de Libertação de Angola (MPLA) and the União Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA) came to end. UNITA was itself originally composed of former members of the Frente Nacional de Libertação de Angola (FNLA), a group dominated by the Bakongo peoples in the north of the country, but later decided to break off and claimed to represent the Ovimbundu peoples living in the country’s interiors, setting itself up as the main opposition party. This set the group apart from the Creole-&#160;and Mbundu-dominant MPLA and its coastal, urban strongholds. The death of UNITA’s charismatic leader Jonas Savimbi allowed the country’s leadership to quickly reinvent itself amid the growing narrative across the continent of an `Africa Rising’. From the civil war’s divisions came national unity.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P2">Set along the Atlantic Ocean in southern Africa and sharing a border with the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) to the north, Zambia to the east and Namibia to the south, Angola’s 1.2m. sq&#160;km area, 1,600&#160;km of coastline and abundant natural resources have provided the country with the geopolitical potential to further cement its role as a major regional player in sub-Saharan Africa. Much of this economic clout is derived from its vital oil wealth, principally sourced from the waters outside the detached territorial enclave of Cabinda to the north.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P3">The regional influence of Angola is most evident from its major role in achieving the independence of its southern neighbour, Namibia, on 22 March 1990. This historical moment in Southern Africa was the fruit of one of the continent’s major military battles in the small bush town of Cuito Cuanavale in January and February 1988. Vital Cuban military support dealt apartheid South Africa’s first decisive military defeat against another African army as it sought to interfere with Angola’s internal power struggles. The negotiations held in New York, USA, in December 1988 secured the withdrawal of Cuba’s protective force of 50,000 troops on Angolan soil, under the condition that South Africa not only withdraw its troops but also allow its colony, then known as South-West Africa (itself a legacy of German colonization), to accede to independence. The famous battle marked a definitive turning point in Angola’s civil war, although the two remaining military forces would continue to fight in a long and protracted civil conflict.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P4">
      The rebuilding process was accompanied by the legacy of decades of nearly constant war that would leave deep physical and psychological scars across the country after the death of an estimated 500,000 Angolans. The abrupt turn to rehabilitation quickly became a monumental task. Rising revenues from a burgeoning oil sector provided the financial foundations to enact a nationwide social and economic reconstruction effort, although foreign and international aid and assistance was also required to rebuild the country’s devastated infrastructure and hollowed out government apparatus. This herculean task fell to the war’s ultimate victors, the 
      <i>nomenklatura</i>
       of insider elites aligned with then President José Eduardo dos Santos as the central nexus who was determined to single-handedly transform his role from the `architect of peace’ to the `architect of reconstruction’.
    </p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P5">Heavy-handed authoritarian tactics remained in place to suppress dissent, being justified as necessary means to maintain the fragile social stability within a population exhausted from conflict. The concentration of power within the inner elite circle of dos Santos led the Government quickly to expand its control and influence over the country’s resources, anchored in a system of patrimonial distribution in exchange for loyalty and regime continuation. These authoritarian tactics were not unique to the consolidated clan in power, but rather learned and studied strategies of Angola’s first President, Dr Agostinho Neto, himself a student of the oppressive Portuguese colonial regime that left heavy impressions on the path the country is currently set upon.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Colonial Pasts Informing Future Spaces</heading>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P6">A confluence of events led Portugal to experience unique pressures in the late 1950s and early 1960s that produced rapid institutional changes across its empire, leading to historic repercussions for the viability of its overseas projects. Domestically, the colonies were putting heavy financial pressures on a country with an underdeveloped economy unable to cope. Likewise, international criticism led by the rise of a strong self-determination sentiment within the newly founded United Nations (UN—established in October 1945), backed by the two anti-colonialist superpowers, also put Portugal in an increasingly difficult position in its insistence on preserving its colonies. In fact, Portugal officially changed its territorial administration in 1949 from a colonial empire to a `pluri-continental nation’, including its `overseas provinces’. In December 1960 tensions further escalated with the UN’s Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. At the same time that the international environment became increasingly hostile to the idea of colonial possessions, domestic turmoil began to reach its breaking point.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P7">In an effort to preserve its colonial empire and quell rising social grievances, the economist-turned-dictator, António de Oliveira Salazar, imposed stricter financial reforms designed to alleviate the heavy fiscal burden of the colonies by adopting coercive measures of fiscal capture. The laser-like focus on finances created a form of `financial dictatorship’ at home and abroad. Economic performance quickly took precedence in the peripheral spaces as Portugal’s development plan laid out in 1953 focused almost exclusively on the construction of the infrastructure necessary (roads, ports, hydroelectric projects) to allow for the installation of settlers and the extraction of their production to overseas markets. At the particular juncture in the world economy, which was recovering from the massive disruptions of the two World Wars ravaging Europe, North Africa and parts of Asia, colonial Angola found itself well situated in the recovering global marketplace in the production of a small range of commercial crops (maize, beans, sugar, sisal) and natural resources (timber), with the coffee bean emerging as the most prized natural resource.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P8">The growing pressures focused on exports stirred up mounting animus against colonial authorities by both the native Angolan populations and the European settlers. This escalating social unrest led to a transformation of the colony’s political economy in the 1960s to place greater importance on development within the overseas province itself and, at least theoretically, improving living standards through an incremental industrialization of the colonial economies. The retooling of the vision of Portugal’s colonial empire took shape as its previous `Colonial Pact’ policy was rebranded as the `Portuguese Economic Space’, thereby eliminating the semantic differentiation between the territories while formulating a stronger economic integration strategy. Administrative reforms designed to allow for more internal economic development accrued to the groups already favourably positioned in the colonial social order, leaving the African population increasingly sidelined from the benefits of growth while still under obligation to pay into a predatory colonial system.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P9">This growing chasm of social inequalities would subsequently set up a long and bloody path towards independence. A major trigger in this fight was a rural uprising beginning on 4 January 1961 by forced indentured rural peasants working cotton fields in Baixa de Cassanje, costing the lives of an estimated 40,000 people. Another major outbreak of violence in a prison in the capital, Luanda, on 4 February 1961, led by FNLA sympathizers, marked the beginning of the struggle for independence. These events placed major pressure on colonial authorities to walk back their forced labour models as it severely disrupted the social and economic lifestyles of the African populations. Yet these uprisings merely represented an early warning sign, as grievances swelled under the authoritarian yoke of the Salazar dictatorship.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P10">
      The ensuing colonial war marked a clear break in the history of Portugal’s empire as well as the foundations of Angolan nationalism. This led Portugal to abolish its colonial social caste system, a principal source of the rising pressures of local grievance and rebellion. In particular, the 1899 Statute of the Portuguese Natives of the Provinces of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea divided the native population into an 
      <i>indígena</i>
       category separate from the `civilized’ European or the rarely granted status of 
      <i>assimilado</i>
       blacks or mestiços who enjoyed the same rights as the Portuguese. This 
      <i>indigenato</i>
       regime codified the daily life of the native populations and stipulated that the natives were legally required to work in order to provide the material means of their survival. Their exploitation through taxation created additional burdens on these populations and led to generalized resistance against the colonial regime. The weight of living and operating under the 
      <i>indígena</i>
       regime and its mechanisms of marginalization were central motivators for the local pockets of resistance against the colonial system.
    </p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P11">
      Angolans would not achieve independence until the colonial dictatorship was overthrown, triggered by a 
      <i>coup d’état </i>
       engineered by the military and later supported by the Portuguese people themselves, motivated in part by the costly and deadly colonial wars. The Carnation Revolution began on 2 April 1974 and paved the way for a power-sharing agreement between the main political parties having led the arduous war for independence: the MPLA under Agostinho Neto, the FNLA under Holden Roberto and UNITA under Jonas Savimbi. While the official independence date of Angola is 11 November 1975, the transitional government began its creation on 31 January 1975 through the Alvor Agreement signed on 15 January between the post-Salazarist Portuguese Government and the three political groups it officially recognized. Angola would be the last of Portugal’s African colonies to set up a transitional government, but its creation quickly broke down due to internal power struggles amid the nearly nine-month delay between independence and the first elections, originally scheduled for October 1975.
    </p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Civil War and Foreign Influence</heading>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P12">As the Alvor Agreement negotiations slowly collapsed and the transitional government’s demise became clearer, the emerging political parties each began to consolidate their respective political and military allies, culminating in a `Scramble for Angola’. A battle for the control of the capital quickly ensued, exacerbated by the intervention of foreign interference motivated by geopolitical concerns of the future composition of a soon to be independent Angola. However, rather than a product of the Cold War, the root causes of the civil war originated long before independence and solidified within the social, geographic and ethnic divisions built into the three Angolan nationalist movements, themselves largely forged through the colonial experience.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P13">The foreign actors joining this complex sociological matrix descending on Angola with the goal of positioning themselves for its future independence had no real idea how the combination of their respective interventions would dramatically escalate the conflict. As foreign arrivals increased, the ultimate endgame of power and authority became diluted in the amalgam of conflicting interests. Many of the military partnerships initially forged would waver, crumble and renew throughout the ensuing civil war, further exacerbating the war’s divisions.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P14">The status of allies and enemies was rarely clear in the heat of war. On the one hand, some allies did remain loyal. Cuba and Yugoslavia never wavered in their support for their `socialist’ ally. The People’s Republic of China gave temporary, limited support to both UNITA and the FNLA. Chinese military instructors were on the ground by mid-1974 and left on 27 October 1975, positioning themselves in Zaire (as the DRC was then known) without crossing into Angola, while instructors from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North Korea), who were already on the ground in Zaire training President Joseph-Désiré Mobutu’s elite forces, also assisted in the training of UNITA troops. As an ideological battleground of the Cold War, military and political support was not unconditional. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) even temporarily withdrew its support for the MPLA between 1973 and 1975 due to a temporary power-sharing agreement between Neto and Roberto’s FNLA group, which was perceived by the USSR as ceding too much political control given the FNLA’s close ties to Mobutu’s Zaire as well as the growing threat of South African forces that had invaded the territory from the southern border in August 1975. The MPLA’s victory over the latter at the battle of Quifangondo on 10 November 1975 secured its control over Luanda and its historic place as the forebearer of independence. The weakened FNLA retreated to Zaire, where its protector eventually pulled its support in 1978, as Mobutu sought to engage with the new Angolan Government.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P15">On the other hand, some allies changed sides as the power struggle evolved. The USA provided assistance to both UNITA and the FNLA at various points in the war before pulling its support, notably after the South Africans began their retreat, the fall of the USSR reduced the threat of communism spreading, and the USA no longer saw strategic interest in supporting the guerrilla war. For its part, South Africa supported both the FNLA and UNITA at different times. The South African Government had multiple interests in influencing internal Angolan politics, most notably its fear of a Marxist, anti-apartheid government giving shelter to the South West Africa People’s Organization of Namibia (SWAPO) independent movement on its southern border, which had been operating there since the mid-1960s. Likewise, the development of a hydroelectric project on the Cunene river was set to provide irrigation and electricity to the arid regions of modern-day northern Namibia. Ultimately, it was the South African troop invasion across the southern border in mid-October 1975 that convinced Cuba’s Prime Minister, Fidel Castro Ruz, to send troops into Angola in support of the ideologically aligned MPLA. This decisive decision was taken solely by Castro, only later supported by the USSR. Ironically, apartheid South Africa also produced mercenary soldiers that at once fought against the MPLA forces, the Forças Armadas de Angola, before being pulled across the battle lines as soldiers of fortune selling their mercenary services in support of the MPLA.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P16">
      The accumulation of wavering commitments, weak alliances and self-interested actors accentuated the seasoned mindset of Angola’s elites with the reality that true loyalty is a rare resource in the political arena, and reinforced the fact that the most effective currency for maintaining allies and alliances was money and access to power. As evidenced by its duration and intensity, the Angolan civil war was an extremely complex phenomenon bringing together national, regional and international forces. However, the role and influence of foreign actors have tended to overshadow the deep endogenous roots of the conflict. The attempted 
      <i>coup d’état </i>
       shortly after independence would bring home this hard reality in the early years of the Republic.
    </p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Authoritarian `Socialism’</heading>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P17">
      Having won control of Luanda, MPLA leader Neto unilaterally proclaimed the new country’s independence on 11 November 1975. For their part, UNITA and the FNLA similarly declared their own Democratic People’s Republic of Angola in Huambo (formerly Nova Lisboa), at the time the country’s second largest city, although it was never officially recognized. While President Neto would only hold power until 1979, his influence was vitally important in locking in the country’s ideological path that its independent foundations would be built upon. The `socialist’ revolution that he purportedly sought for Angola’s transformation was quickly undermined by the 
      <i>coup d’état</i>
       on 27 May 1977, led by Alves Bernardo Batista (more commonly known as Nito Alves) and José Van Dunem, quelled in large part by Cuban forces already in the country. This quickly descended into a violent purge of factions of MPLA adherents deemed disloyal to the MPLA’s main political programme. The ideals of the `socialist’ revolution quickly withered away under the increasing adoption of the same authoritarian tactics of Salazar’s Portugal as the MPLA purged its party of the `Nitistas’ and the ideals that Nito Alves championed.
    </p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P18">
      While this episode was a mostly urban affair, the authoritarian response would consolidate power across the territory. In particular, the MPLA moved in 1977 to dismantle the revolutionary `people’s power’ organizations that had been established under the Law on People’s Power in 1975. Despite the misleading name of the law, its actual purpose was to effectively usurp the public’s ability to exercise popular autonomy which had begun to take form upon independence. This law had allowed for the organization of elections of various organizations, including trade unions, student associations and even political parties. Although these organizations could channel popular sentiment, they remained appendages beholden to the MPLA’s political party structure. Being perceived as complicit in the organization of the 
      <i>coup d’état </i>
      , these organizations were disbanded, with the Law on People’s Power being rescinded as well.
    </p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P19">While the internal political purge was still active, during 4–11 December 1977 the MPLA convened its first congress, where it officially adopted its `Marxist-Leninist’ character and its `socialist’ production model. The two events colliding in history imbued the MPLA’s `Marxism-Leninism’ with the cold authoritarian streak already engrained by the colonial experience. This political crackdown and consolidation in 1977 further cemented the MPLA’s approach to controlling and manipulating popular initiatives, whether led by the consolidating urban civil society or later adopted to counter emerging civil society organizations (CSOs) and non-governmental organization (NGO) influences.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P20">During his short reign in power, a critical component of Neto’s tenure in regard to rebuilding the country was that of absence. Independence and the ensuing civil war provoked the exodus of nearly all of the Portuguese settlers, taking what they could with them, and even sabotaging what they could not. This led to the complete disarticulation of the rural economy, and severely hindered the technical and logistical know-how required to pursue its continuation. Under the constant pressure of war, this dismantling created the need to finance foodstuffs, organize a distribution network for goods and services, and rebuild the institutions left idle or crumbling in the wake of independence. Across the board, deterioration reigned and massive structural difficulties loomed large. Among the most pressing issues was the relationship of the rural communities, at the time comprising approximately 80% of the total population, with the newly established state in a post-colonial society still devoid of formed notions of a nation.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P21">The widespread weakened links to social commonalities were in large part a result of the geographic marginalization of wide swaths of the country. The political system tasked with taking on these enormous issues was an approach based on a colonial authoritarian heritage mixed within a `socialist’ bureaucracy and run by stalled institutions nationwide. With this system, the MPLA would have to start anew with little to no time for preparation. The weak transitional government would need a foundational structure in order to achieve the monumental task of not only feeding its population, but also running a nascent country. Given the extreme social turbulence, however, national food production plummeted. Outside of urban enclaves, the institutionalization of the new Angolan state and the expansion of its authority could be measured alongside the tyre tracks of food distribution networks.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P22">The new Government sought to rebuild the country while the civil war continued unabated. The institutional framework began to take concrete form after the resolution on economic policy passed by the Central Committee of the Party in October 1976. The Law of State Intervention (of 1977) led the Government to begin setting up the nationalized state enterprises allowing for the nationalization and confiscation of private property. This nationalization process of Angola’s resources post-independence gave omnipresent power to the governing party, which was now in charge of remaking the entire political economy in its image with little, if any, opposition. Many of these takeovers were later formed into monopolistic companies dominant in specific sectors of the economy, representing a feature and not a bug in the `socialist’ system.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P23">The organization of the rural economy, lauded for its prowess in colonial times, followed the centralizing social and productive forces of Marxism-Leninism, upholding the farmer as an idealized symbol of the hard-working masses powering the engine of the country’s growth. This idolization is featured prominently on the national flag adopted upon independence, symbolized by the principal tool of the peasantry, the machete, in effect sharpening the gears of the imminent industrialization of the country. The strategy was two-fold: nationalize and reactivate the colonial-era farms; and organize peasants into associations and co-operatives, the latter being overseen and directed by the Government through the Confederation of Associations of Peasants and Agro-livestock Co-operatives of Angola, created in 1980. In the same way that the Law on People’s Power was in reality a tool to reduce the autonomous spaces of the population and guide them into controlled and supervised groups better aimed at furthering the Government’s power and influence, the peasant associative and co-operative movement appeared to be the rural version of this strategy. Such desires for a state-led centralized agricultural system would have to be nearly completely rebuilt, but its strategy would be based on its colonial heritage. The incoming MPLA leaders were adept students of the Salazarian model of authoritarian governance, having grown up within its system.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P24">Nationalizing the colonial farms permitted the party to keep key productive resources under its strict control, while the associative and co-operative movements gave the Government oversight and control over the country’s most productive rural economic actors. Measures of total control of the rural economy, notably its productive economic agents, were the order of the day. Not only was the `socialist’ system a pretext for control over social organization and economic development, but it was also used as a political system to usurp agency and autonomy from the workers. Autonomous capital accumulation and social organizing represented an unacceptable political risk, particularly with the ensuing civil war, unleashing political forces that resigned the rural populations to a position of exclusion politically, socially, economically, institutionally and even symbolically. The urban/rural divide of the conflict, with UNITA’s strongholds spread throughout the countryside, represented a major obstacle to implementing any coherent rural policies.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P25">The historical reality of senior MPLA officials making policies to develop the peripheral areas of Angola is that those areas were, during significant time periods in contemporary history, ruled and pillaged through a combination of forces intent on the destruction of the MPLA and thus by extension the very seed of `revolution’ that liberated the country from external oppression. While the war was won at heavy cost, the internationalization of the countryside by destructive military actions through the aforementioned Scramble for Angola not only released profound forces that changed the course of the civil war, but similarly left an enduring legacy that has unleashed further fundamental forces of social control that remain difficult to discern, but palpable none the less. The death of President Neto on 10 September 1979 led to the arrival of José Eduardo dos Santos, who would remain in power until 26 September 2017. He would inherit this legacy of absence, mistrust, urban bias, and a dilapidated party-state fighting for survival.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Elections, War and Peace</heading>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P26">Working from their political stronghold of Luanda, both Neto and dos Santos eventually moved from loosely held dogmatic beliefs to pragmatic positions, focusing their attention on maintaining semblances of stability among the populations of their rapidly growing urban strongholds during the increasingly costly civil war. As a guerrilla movement, UNITA was established by Jonas Savimbi in March 1966 and claimed to represent first and foremost the rural African populations, thereby positioning itself in opposition to the Creole, urban-based MPLA. While its identity was established with its rural roots in the central highlands, UNITA’s ideological belief structure was much more pragmatic than fundamentalist.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P27">
      Savimbi’s `anti-colonial’ message was a rhetorical political tool, but it did not stop him from partnering with apartheid South Africans in violating the country’s territorial sovereignty or from accepting assistance from the USA’s Central Intelligence Agency. Instead, he constructed a `nativist’ nationalist discourse to project a self-crafted image in order to position himself as a political counterpower capable of championing the marginalized peoples across the countryside. Marginalization was measured as the distance from the social hierarchy established through the legacy of colonial rule, although pragmatism pushed him to accept certain rural social groups that found themselves once part of or connected to the colonial regime. By having partnered with the Portuguese before 1974 to fight against the MPLA and later working in tandem with the South Africans from 1975, UNITA demonstrated how 
      <i>realpolitik </i>
       trumped any core ideology. Rather, these actions were the pure pursuit of power seeking to install an Afro-centrist nationalist power structure elevating rural indigenous culture over the supposedly imported urbanized model projected by the MPLA.
    </p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P28">Until relatively recently, the main lines weaving together UNITA’s historical narrative have been distilled into a two-stage evolution between its 1980s conventional Cold War character, morphing in the 1990s into a destructive resource war of attrition. UNITA controlled up to 80% of the mostly rural national territory with important areas rich in diamonds to finance its war effort. The notion of `control’ is relative, however, as the loss and gain of territory was in constant flux in bordering areas. This notion extends to the populations that lived near or under UNITA operations, as fragile territorial control translates to a weakened capacity to impose any durable sense of authority and adhesion to a common political cause.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P29">Even in spaces under de facto UNITA control, its lack of overall resources, organizational capacity and its difficulties in setting up reliable supply chains made its ability to secure and institutionalize a permanent presence extremely difficult. Furthermore, territorial instability was a part of UNITA’s military strategy itself. Upending the livelihoods of certain populations to cause additional logistical problems for the MPLA made forced migration a de facto instrument of war. Much of UNITA’s nation-building project was implemented to varying degrees depending on the geographical location of the spaces, the infrastructural heritage of the urban areas occupied in the 1990s, and their relative connections with their limited supply chains and logistics capacities. The strategic alliance with South Africa along the southern border provided a much-improved logistics network, making its unofficial capital in Jamba a natural headquarters for the factional group.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P30">While the Angolan civil war is often understood as essentially lasting from 1975 until 2002, it did have momentary lapses of fragile ceasefires in 1991–92 and 1994–98. The first peace process in 1991, known as the Bicesse Accords, set up the country’s first multi-party parliamentary elections on 12 September 1992, which were narrowly won by the MPLA (with 49.6% of the votes cast) and rejected by UNITA (which received 40.1%). The UN considered the process mostly free and fair, although errors due to inexperience were also noted. According to the results, both parties handily won their provincial strongholds, including Benguela, Bié, Huambo and Kuando Kubango for UNITA, and Luanda, Bengo, Kwanza-Norte and Malanje for the MPLA. Despite the largely urban/rural divide between the warring sides, the distribution of votes appeared much more complex, with the MPLA also scoring major victories in largely rural, interior provinces such as Lunda-Norte, Lunda-Sul and Cunene that were far from the MPLA’s sphere of immediate influence. Following the ethnic distribution across the territory, UNITA’s belligerent ethno-nationalism seemed to be rejected by a majority of voters in those areas where Ovimbundus are not numerous. As a result, the MPLA emerged from the 1992 elections as a regionally and ethnically integrated party.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P31">Nevertheless, the election results did codify an important ideological marker in the country’s political landscape as the provinces staked out their first official political positions. The dark cloud hanging over the countryside since the 1992 general elections that saw many rural areas vote UNITA persisted in the MPLA’s spirit like a foggy casualty of war and an affront to its `revolutionary’ colonial fight. The rural character of UNITA’s stronghold based in the central highlands, headquartered first in the provincial capital of Huambo until 1993, when it was forced to find refuge in Jamba, made the Luanda-based MPLA deeply distrustful of large swaths of the rural populations having voted for UNITA. Moreover, the `blood and soil’ nationalism of Jonas Savimbi and his claims that the Ovimbundu people were the `real Angolans’ raised further hesitations of how to approach and later integrate those followers into the MPLA’s national project. This political reality led the dos Santos regime to double down on its urban political power centres, despite only approximately 37% of Angolans living in cities in 1990.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P32">In a return to war in 1992, after UNITA rejected the election results, the following two years witnessed some of the worst fighting experienced in the country. More of the Angolan population died between October 1992 and November 1994 than in the previous 16 years of conflict. The intensifying battle moving from the countryside to the cities destroyed what remained of the economy. The second attempt at a peaceful resolution came in 1994 with the Lusaka Protocol, promoting political reconciliation and the integration of UNITA military forces into the national army. The conditions for the ceasefire were never fully met and the process broke down in 1998. The MPLA then made a concerted push to overtake UNITA’s stronghold in the central highlands and by the end of the century many of its bases along the Zambian border had also been captured, straining UNITA’s ability to resupply its dwindling resources. Savimbi’s death in February 2002 led UNITA to sign a peace treaty on 4 April, officially bringing the civil war to a close, although the Cabinda insurgency has endured. After securing the international borders, the total territorial sovereignty of the country under one Government was finally achieved.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>The Great Reconstruction</heading>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P33">The UN’s various peacekeeping missions beginning in 1989 played a marginal role in maintaining the peace, alongside the work of numerous NGOs, CSOs, and religious organizations. The UN missions overall were largely seen as failures, as they were unable to bring any prolonged stability to the country or to protect civilians from attack. The missions were criticized both by the Angolan population for their inability to stop the conflict and by both warring parties, which ultimately demanded their withdrawal in 1999, leaving behind only 30 workers in the UN Office in Angola.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P34">The pursuit of peace became one of the most important historical conjunctures bringing together groups of actors that had previously been operating separately in their own areas of influence, spearheaded by the initiative of religious institutions. Having previously advocated for peace separately, the major Protestant organizations of the Council of Christian Churches of Angola, founded in February 1977, and the Angolan Evangelical Alliance, as well the Angolan Catholic Church’s Episcopal Conference of Angola and São Tomé, became involved in the founding of the Peacebuilding Programme in 1998. These different civic and religious organizations later merged to create the Inter-Ecclesial Committee for Peace in Angola in 1999 in order to unite forces as a demonstration of hope to overcome historical tensions and rivalries for the common good. Coming from a serious democratic deficit, the pro-peace movements spurred major social organizing initiatives across the country and became part of the first attempts at healing the brutal scars left behind by the war. Further collaborative efforts continued to evolve with the needs on the ground during reconstruction, thereby consolidating and energizing civil society initiatives faced with an authoritarian regime determined to control the direction of the national dialogue, by force if necessary.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P35">The sociological schisms resulting from 41 years of war, between fighting for independence and the subsequent civil war, has definitively marked the ethos of the country for the foreseeable future. War has been a central influence in the construction of Angola’s post-colonial state as it profoundly influenced the organization and structure of the political powers. Immediately after the civil war, the MPLA deployed a heavily authoritarian security apparatus throughout the country in order to re-establish both state and human security, given that it controlled only 40% of the territory prior to the end of the conflict. Alongside the security presence, a massive deployment of public resources was enacted, destined for a nationwide reconstruction effort focused on transportation networks, schools, government offices and medical posts.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P36">This resource deployment was accompanied by the implantation of government officials, effectively establishing the MPLA as the legitimate modern-legal authority throughout the territory. The population, worn down by war, sought more than anything else a return to social stability. However, the bleak presence of the Government at the local level and its disconnect from the populations it is tasked to nominally serve undermine both its attempts to spread its capacity outside of urban areas and its ability to effect structural change in the lives of everyday Angolans. This neglect would grow to become another central feature of the MPLA’s governance model more generally, as peacetime spending levels in basic services such as education and health mirrored those during wartime, despite the oil boom of the 2000s providing the potential resources.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P37">A lack of transparency and the widespread use of patronage and clientelism were a major impediment for international financial institutions when strategizing how to engage with Angola’s fractured political environment. The greatest asset to the world economy that Angola possesses is its vast oil wealth, managed by the state behemoth Sociedade Nacional de Combustíveis de Angola (SONANGOL) and jealously guarded by the inner elite circle of the MPLA-led Government. A major point of reform requested from Western donors was transparency of all the actors linked to the sector, which simultaneously financed the Government’s weakened capacity to run the country, powered the MPLA’s war machine, and held the financial power behind the hopes of rebuilding once the war ended. It was particularly this third purpose that drew the majority of calls for systemic reforms and transparency.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P38">Such demands were warranted. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), in the final years of the war between 1997 and 2002, US&#160;$4,220m. went entirely unaccounted for, diverted through opaque networks operating with the support of a group of politically connected Angolans and a small cadre of Western-based facilitators. The serial misuse of resources has had a wide-ranging impact on the relationship between the Government, the international community and increasingly Angolans themselves. The entrance of China’s financial diplomacy into Angola in March 2004, just as the country was emerging from its civil war, allowed the former its initial foothold in Africa in exchange for massive oil-backed loans. This financing would help fuel major reconstruction efforts but also provoke internal power struggles as to who would benefit most from this massive infusion of money into the opaque Reconstruction Office in charge of the rebuilding projects.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P39">While many donors remained committed to humanitarian and emergency assistance after the war, as the years of peacetime grew and the economy boomed on the back of rising oil prices, international donors began to pull out of the country. Angola became to be seen as too `wealthy’ in resources to merit intensive donor activity. Simultaneously, the continued lack of transparency or serious reform by the Angolan authorities caused other organizations to consider whether providing services that the Government should be performing was ultimately the best strategy for the country. The fact that the Government has continued to attribute paltry sums to the key sectors of health and education, with minimal difference from wartime to peacetime, gives credence to the idea that these sectors would have remained underfunded with or without the presence of non-state actors. It cannot be known for sure, but the Government certainly has not proven otherwise in the two decades since.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P40">A general review of the major economic and social indicators of Angola in the 21st century allows us a broad understanding of how economic growth has translated to social progress during the reign of President José Eduardo dos Santos throughout the period of peacetime. The sustainability of the noted improvements remains an open question, given the extreme volatility the country has experienced in the last two decades, spurred on by boom and bust cycles of international oil prices. Angola has one of the world’s least diversified export economies, being almost wholly reliant on diamonds and oil for access to foreign currency revenue, while these economic conditions are responsible for providing for a total population that has nearly doubled since 2000 to 34m.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P41">The phenomenon of rural flight is more prevalent than other regional countries due to the intense civil war. The urban population has grown by nearly 145% over the last two decades as rural populations grew by 30%. Over the same period life expectancy has improved significantly (by nearly 15 years, representing a 30.5% increase), although the country was ranked 148th out of 189 countries in 2022, according to the Human Development Index (HDI) produced by the UN Development Programme. The fight against poverty, the measure of which is living on less than US&#160;$1.90 per day based on 2011 purchasing-power parity, has stalled alongside rapid population growth, increasing in absolute numbers throughout the period of peacetime. Nationally, 52.9% of the Angolan population lives on less than $3.65 per day, the international poverty line for lower-middle income countries. While the number of undernourished people has been halved in the last two decades, over 5.5m. people remain unable to correctly feed themselves.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P42">A major culprit of this entrenched poverty and consistent malnourishment is the weak institutional articulation between policies and programmes aimed at reducing these numbers, as well as climatic instability with recurrent droughts gravely affecting the southern provinces. The country has made some progress on the HDI, but this again has been modest. Between 2000 and 2019 its HDI score improved from 0.394 to 0.581, representing a 47% increase. Given that the country was emerging from nearly 40 years of war at the turn of the century, it should come as no surprise that Angola has gained considerable ground in these various indicators. Stagnating indicators invite serious criticism of the MPLA’s long rule due to Angola’s continued languishing among the bottom ranks of the world.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>The Arrival of João Lourenço: Transitions and Transformations? </heading>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P43">In 2010 significant changes were made to the Constitution in the distribution of power and authority through a modification of the electoral system to mirror that of South Africa. Direct presidential elections were replaced by parliamentary elections, whereby the party winning the most seats in the Assembleia Nacional (National Assembly) would de facto win the presidency. The legislative elections of 23 August 2017 set in motion an historic power transfer from dos Santos, in power for 38 years, to Gen. João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço. Lourenço had spent his professional career deep within the military structure, joining the Central Committee of the MPLA in 1985 and becoming a member of the Politiburo in 1990. He was President of the MPLA parliamentary group from 1991 to 1998 and occupied the role of first Vice-President of the National Assembly from 2003 to 2014. In the latter year he was nominated by presidential decree to become Minister of National Defence, a role he held until the electoral campaign in 2017.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P44">In the mean time, Lourenço became Vice-President of the MPLA in 2016. He was integrated into the military and security services, which provided him with a strong internal support mechanism in his eventual attempts at taking over the helm of the party and the Government as a whole. This insider knowledge and deep military and political connections would become his greatest assets in taking over the party from the entrenched dos Santos clan, whose family members had been nominated to key positions throughout the Government during his last years in power to maintain influence after the President’s departure.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P45">Beyond underfinancing development, one of the most nefarious political realities consolidated by the elite circle directed by dos Santos was the creation of an effective party-state where MPLA interests merged the public and private spheres within the country. This had the effect of not only normalizing a culture of endemic corruption among elites, siphoning off public funds for private gain, but also cementing a reputation of corruption, mismanagement and lack of transparency among international financial institutions and major donor agencies. This has severely damaged Angola’s institutional reputation among these key organizations. Rectifying this degraded image was a principal task of Lourenço’s first mandate as he embarked on an anti-corruption campaign largely seen as inadequate given the severity of the problem and the presence of key officials accused of corruption within his own administration.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P46">The MPLA remains largely unopposed across the state apparatus, and few major figures have paid serious penalties outside of the immediate dos Santos family and some of their closest advisers. Centralizing corruption in political discourse during his first campaign has, however, energized the civil society actors advocating for the end of elite impunity, greater transparency, investment in better social services, and the adoption of good governance practices. In fact, Angola’s civil society has grown increasingly vocal throughout the last decade, with anti-Government protests beginning to emerge in 2011, expanding in 2013 and 2014 amid plummeting oil prices and economic turmoil, simmering until the elections in 2017, and becoming even more vocal during Lourenço’s second term.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P47">
      The public’s mounting frustrations with the MPLA’s authoritarian rule over a country stagnating under poverty and mismanagement was on full display in the lead up to the country’s fifth multi-party elections of 24 August 2022. UNITA nominated a charismatic, 60-year-old leader, Adalberto Costa Júnior, and his popularity was evident as he used his communication skills to mobilize massive shows of support during the campaign, notably in the major coastal cities. Positioning himself as the candidate of hope and change, UNITA had never come so close to finally garnering an electoral majority and thus capturing the presidency. However, fundamental political change would not arrive in 2022. Shortly after the parliamentary elections, the Comissão Nacional Eleitoral declared that the MPLA had won a slim majority of votes (51.2%) with UNITA placed second (with 44.0%). These results were further confirmed by the Constitutional Court, with both institutions under 
      
      the firm control of the Government.
    </p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P48">UNITA’s leader continued to contest election `irregularities’ but never overtly claimed the presence of electoral fraud. This balancing act allowed Costa Júnior to maintain pressure on the Government, preserve legitimacy in the eyes of his voters, while also facilitating the position of his party members taking their seats inside the National Assembly. UNITA gained 39 seats compared with the 2017 election, for a total of 90, while the MPLA lost 26 for a total of 124. This calculation left the MPLA with only a relative majority. This is considerable because the National Assembly will now require political compromise if Lourenço’s administration is to pass any significant legislation.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P49">Ultimately, the election results have shown a steady decline in the MPLA’s electoral performance, systematically lowering its score by some 10% each election. The MPLA lost heavily in Luanda, with UNITA earning 63% of the votes to the MPLA’s 33%. The erosion of the MPLA’s support among urban citizens represents a major change in the composition of the parties’ respective electoral bases. UNITA traditionally positioned itself as a rural-based coalition focused on the inner provinces but has since extended its support to the younger urban masses desperate for change. The MPLA therefore owes its contested victory to the votes of Angolans averse to major change, dependent on, or beneficiary to, the current social structures, as well as some rural and provincial voters. The latter categories are significant as they represent areas of the country the Government has traditionally neglected in favour of a modernist urban bias agenda.</p>
     </gen-section>
     <gen-section print-style="COLUMN" sllink="SLSDOC" slsdocrf="GEN-SECTREF">
          <heading>Conclusion</heading>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P50">According to recent estimates, nearly 80% of Angola’s population is 34 years of age or younger, meaning that the oldest of this group would have been 15 when the peace accords were signed in 2002. This youth bulge is coming of age in a time of post-civil war and with a significant portion connected to the internet and social media. For these Angolans the years of war and destruction are felt through painful family histories of suffering rather than personal experience. During the 2022 elections and in their aftermath, different security services were frequently mobilized as a show of force, violently dispersing and arresting demonstrators. While the resort to state violence remains a useful tool for authoritarian rule, the use and abuse of force are far less accepted by average Angolans today who are more willing to speak out and push back against such measures. These changing demographics represent a serious challenge for the Government to channel this enormous human capital into positive directions, calling upon the need for major social and economic reforms as the stagnating status quo foments widespread resentment.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P51">The next major political issue facing the country will be the decision to organize the country’s first elections at the local level. Promised for 2020, they were cancelled supposedly due to complications from COVID-19 and never revived. The aversion to going forward with these elections is a strong indication that the Government fears a popular backlash against their stranglehold on power and control at all levels of government. In the current system, local officials are appointed by the provincial government, and the provincial governors, the most senior executives, are appointed by the President. Local elections therefore have the potential to finally grant control of decision-making to opposing parties and bring stronger representation to the community level.</p>
          <p id="AO.HI.SGM.672415.2.SAFARIK.P52">With President João Lourenço no longer seen as a novel actor capable of bringing positive change to a sclerotic system, his second term has been fraught with difficulties in delivering further continuity to the MPLA’s political future. Significant economic reforms and rising oil prices have finally brought growth back, but removing fuel subsidies sparked protests suppressed by violent police tactics. Without better redistribution of the benefits of an improving economy, popular frustrations will remain palpable. The combination of stagnation, growing discontent among the masses, and a President now perceived as a continuation of the same policies failing the majority of Angolans has increased the stakes for the political class leading the country. Across the aisle, the burgeoning opposition sees itself as one election away from ascending to the presidency for the first time in one of Africa’s major regional powers.</p>
     </gen-section>
</country-survey>